The Project Gutenberg eBook, The Adventures of Herr Baby, by Mrs.
Molesworth, Illustrated by Walter Crane


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: The Adventures of Herr Baby


Author: Mrs. Molesworth



Release Date: July 11, 2009  [eBook #29380]

Language: English


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ADVENTURES OF HERR BABY***


E-text prepared by Delphine Lettau, Clive Pickton, and the Project
Gutenberg Online Distributed Proofreading Canada Team
(http://www.pgdpcanada.net)



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations.
      See 29380-h.htm or 29380-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.org/files/29380/29380-h/29380-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.org/files/29380/29380-h.zip)





THE ADVENTURES OF HERR BABY

by

MRS. MOLESWORTH

Author of 'Carrots,' 'Us,' Etc.


  'I have a boy of five years old:
   His face is fair and fresh to see.'
                             WORDSWORTH

Illustrated by Walter Crane







  [Illustration: There was Baby, seated on the grass, one arm fondly
  clasping Minet's neck, while with the other he firmly held the famous
  money-box.--P. 138.]



London
Macmillan and Co.
and New York
1895

First printed (4to) 1881
Reprinted (Globe 8vo) 1886, 1887, 1890, 1892, 1895




CONTENTS


CHAPTER I.
FOUR YEARS OLD                     1

CHAPTER II.
INSIDE A TRUNK                    20

CHAPTER III.
UP IN THE MORNING EARLY           41

CHAPTER IV.
GOING AWAY                        60

CHAPTER V.
BY LAND AND SEA                   81

CHAPTER VI.
AN OLD SHOP AND AN OGRE          101

CHAPTER VII.
BABY'S SECRET                    125

CHAPTER VIII.
FOUND                            145

CHAPTER IX.
"EAST OR WEST, HAME IS BEST"     163




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS

"OH LOOK, LOOK, BABY'S MADE PEEPY-SNOOZLE INTO
'THE PARSON IN THE PULPIT THAT COULDN'T SAY HIS
PRAYERS,'" CRIED DENNY                                 6

HE SAT WITH ONE ARM PROPPED ON THE TABLE, AND HIS
ROUND HEAD LEANING ON HIS HAND, WHILE THE OTHER
HELD THE PIECE OF BREAD AND BUTTER--BUTTER DOWNWARDS,
OF COURSE                                             16

THERE WAS ONE TRUNK WHICH TOOK MY FANCY MORE
THAN ALL THE OTHERS                                   30

FOR A MINUTE OR TWO BABY COULD NOT MAKE OUT WHAT
HAD HAPPENED                                          50

"ZOU WILL P'OMISE, BETSY, P'OMISE CERTAIN SURE,
NEBBER TO FORGET"                                     61

POOR LITTLE BOYS, FOR, AFTER ALL, FRITZ HIMSELF
WASN'T VERY BIG! THEY STOOD TOGETHER HAND IN
HAND ON THE STATION PLATFORM, LOOKING, AND
FEELING, RATHER DESOLATE                              84

"ARE THAT JOGRAPHY?" HE SAID                          94

"OH AUNTIE," HE SAID, "P'EASE 'TOP ONE MINUTE.
HIM SEES SHINY GLASS JUGS LIKE DEAR LITTLE
MOTHER'S. OH, DO 'TOP"                               106

BABY VENTURED TO PEEP ROUND. THE LITTLE BLACK-EYED
WHITE-CAPPED MAN CAME TOWARDS THEM SMILING           121

THERE WAS BABY, SEATED ON THE GRASS, ONE ARM
FONDLY CLASPING MINET'S NECK, WHILE WITH THE
OTHER HE FIRMLY HELD THE FAMOUS MONEY-BOX            138

AUNTIE STOOD STILL A MOMENT TO LISTEN                155

FORGETTING ALL ABOUT EVERYTHING, EXCEPT THAT HER
BABY WAS FOUND, UP JUMPED MOTHER                     170




THE ADVENTURES OF HERR BABY




CHAPTER I.

FOUR YEARS OLD

  "I was four yesterday; when I'm quite old
   I'll have a cricket-ball made of pure gold;
   I'll never stand up to show that I'm grown;
   I'll go at liberty upstairs or down."


He trotted upstairs. Perhaps trotting is not quite the right word, but I
can't find a better. It wasn't at all like a horse or pony trotting, for
he went one foot at a time, right foot first, and when right foot was
safely landed on a step, up came left foot and the rest of Baby himself
after right foot. It took a good while, but Baby didn't mind. He used to
think a good deal while he was going up and down stairs, and it was not
his way to be often in a hurry. There was one thing he could _not_ bear,
and that was any one trying to carry him upstairs. Oh, that did vex
him! His face used to get quite red, right up to the roots of his curly
hair, and down to the edge of the big collar of his sailor suit, for he
had been put into sailor suits last Christmas, and, if the person who
was lifting him up didn't let go all at once, Baby would begin to wriggle.
He was really clever at wriggling; even if you knew his way it was not
easy to hold him, and with any one that didn't know his way he could get
off in half a minute.

But this time there was no one about, and Baby stumped on--yes _that_ is
a better word--Baby stumped on, or up, "wifout nobody teasing." His face
was grave, very grave, for inside the little house of which his two blue
eyes were the windows, a great deal of work was going on. He was busy
wondering about, and trying to understand, some of the strange news he
had heard downstairs in the drawing-room.

"Over the sea," he said to himself. "Him would like to see the sea.
Auntie said over the sea in a boat, a werry big boat. Him wonders how
big."

And his mind went back to the biggest boat he had ever seen, which was
in the toy-shop at Brookton, when he had gone with his mother to be
fitted for new boots. But even that wouldn't be big enough. Mother, and
auntie, and grandfather, and Celia, and Fritz, and Denny, and cook, and
Lisa, and Thomas and Jones, and the other servants, and the horses,
and--and---- Baby stopped to take breath inside, for though he had not
been speaking aloud he felt quite choked with all the names coming so
fast. "And pussy, and the calanies, and the Bully, and Fritz's dormice,
oh no, them _couldn't_ all get in." Perhaps if Baby doubled up his legs
underneath he might squeeze himself in, but that would be no good, he
couldn't go sailing, sailing all over the sea by himself, like the old
woman in "Harry's Nursery Songs," who went sailing, sailing, up in a
basket, "seventy times as high as the moon." Oh no, even that boat
wouldn't be big enough. They must have one as big as--and Baby stopped
to look round. But just then a shout from inside the nursery made him
wake up, for he had got to the last little stair before the top landing,
and again right foot and half Baby, followed by left foot and the other
half Baby, stumped on their way.

They pulled up--right foot and left foot, with Baby's solemn face top of
all--at the nursery door. It was shut. Now one of the things Baby liked
to do for himself was to open doors, and now and then he could manage it
very well. But, alas, the nursery lock was too high up for him to get a
good hold of it. He pulled, and pushed, and got quite red, all for no
use. Worse than that, the pushing and pulling were heard inside. Some
one came forward and opened the door, nearly knocking poor Baby over.

"Ach, Herr Baby, mine child, why you not say when you come?" Lisa cried
out. Lisa was Baby's nurse. Her face was rosy and round, and she looked
very kind. She would have liked to pick him up to make sure he had got
no knocks, but she knew too well that would not do. So all she could do
was to say again--

"Mine child--ach, Herr Baby!"

Baby did not take any notice.

"Zeally," he said coolly, "ganfather must do somesing to zem locks. Zem
is all most dedful 'tiff."

Lisa smiled to herself. She was used to Baby's ways.

"Herr Baby shall grow tall some day," she said. "Zen him can open
doors."

Lisa's talking was nearly as funny as Baby's, and, indeed, I rather
think that hers had made his all the funnier. But, any way, they
understood each other. He was thinking over what she had said, when a
scream from the nursery made them both turn round in a hurry.

"O Lisa, O Baby, come in quick, do. Peepy-Snoozle has got out of the
cage, and he'll be out at the door in another moment. Quick, quick, come
in and shut the door."

Lisa and Baby did not wait to be twice told. Inside the nursery there
was a great flurry. Celia, Fritz, and Denny were all there crawling over
the floor and screaming at each other.

"_I_ have him! there--oh, now that's too bad. Fritz, you frightened him
away again," called out Celia.

"_Me_ frighten him away! Why he knows me ever so much better than you
girls," said Fritz.

"He just doesn't then," said Denny with triumph, "for here he is safe in
my apron."

But she had hardly said the words when she gave a little scream. "He's
off again, oh quick, Baby, quick, catch him."

How Baby did it, I can't tell. His hands seemed too small to catch
anything, even a dormouse. But catch the truant he did, and very proud
Baby looked when he held up his two little fists, which he had made into
a "mouse-trap" _really_, for the occasion, with Peepy-Snoozle's "coxy"
little head and bright beady eyes poking out at the top.

"Oh look, look, Baby's made Peepy-Snoozle into 'the parson in the pulpit
that couldn't say his prayers,'" cried Denny, dancing about.

"All the same, he'd better go back into his cage," said Fritz, who had a
right to be heard, as he was the master and owner of the dormice. "Come
along, Baby, poke him in."

Baby was busy kissing and petting Peepy-Snoozle by this time, for,
though he did not approve of much of that sort of thing for himself, he
was very fond of petting little animals, who were not little boys. And
to tell the truth, it was not often he got a chance of petting his big
brother's dormice. It was quite pretty to see the way he kissed
Peepy-Snoozle's soft brown head, especially his nose, stroking it gently
against his own smooth cheeks and chattering to the little creature.

"Dear little darling. Sweet little denkle darling," he said. "Him would
like to have a house all full of Peepy-'noozles, zem is so sweet and
soft."

"Wouldn't you like a coat made of their skins?" said Denny. "Think how
soft that would be."

  [Illustration: "Oh look, look, Baby's made Peepy-Snoozle into
  'the parson in the pulpit that couldn't say his prayers,'" cried
  Denny.--P. 6.]

"No, sairtin him wouldn't," said Baby. "Him wouldn't pull off all their
sweet little skins and hairs to make him a coat. Denny's a c'uel girl."

"There won't be much more skin or hairs left if you go on scrubbing him
up and down with your sharp little nose like that," said Fritz.

Baby drew back his face in a fright.

"Put him in the cage then," he said, and with Fritz's help this was
safely done. Then Baby stood silent, slowly rubbing his own nose up and
down, and looking very grave.

"Him's nose _isn't_ sharp," he said at last, turning upon Denny. "Sharp
means knifes and scidders."

All the children burst out laughing. Of course they understood things
better than Baby, for even Denny, the youngest next to him, was nine,
that is twice his age, which by the by was a puzzle to Denny herself,
for Celia had teased her one day by saying that according to that when
Baby was eighty Denny would be a hundred and sixty, and nobody ever
lived to be so old, so how could it be.

But Denny, though she didn't _always_ understand everything herself, was
very quick at taking up other people if they didn't.

"Oh, you stupid little goose," she said. "Of course, Fritz didn't mean
as sharp as a knife. There's different kinds of sharps--there's
different kinds of everything."

Baby looked at her gravely. He had his own way of defending himself.

"Werry well. If him's a goose him won't talk to you, and him won't tell
you somesing _werry_ funny and dedful bootiful that him heard in the
'groind room."

All eyes were turned on Baby.

"Oh, do tell us, Baby darling, _do_ tell us," said Celia and Denny.

Fritz gave Baby a friendly pat on the back.

"You'll tell _me_, old fellow, won't you?" he said. Baby looked at him.

"Yes," he said at last; "him will tell you,'cos you let him have
Peepy-'noozle, and 'cos you doesn't call him a goose--like _girls_ does.
I'll whister in your ear, Fritz, if you'll bend down."

But Celia thought this was too bad.

"_I_ didn't call you a goose, Baby," she said. "I think you might tell
me too."

"And I'll promise never to call you a goose again if you'll tell _me_,"
said Denny.

Baby had a great soul. It was beneath him to take a mean revenge, he
felt, especially on a _girl_! So he shut his little mouth tightly, knit
his little brows, and thought it over for a moment or two. Then his
face cleared.

"Him _will_ tell you all--all you children," he said at last, "but it's
werry long and dedful wonderful, and you mustn't inrumpt him. P'omise?"

"Promise," shouted the three.

"Well then, litsen. We's all goin' away--zeally away--over the
sea--dedful far. As far as the sky, p'raps."

"In a balloon?" said Denny, whose tongue wouldn't keep still even though
she was very much interested in the news.

"No, in a boat," replied Baby, forgetting to notice that this was an
"inrumption," "in a werry 'normous boat. All's going. Him was looking
for 'tamps in mother's basket of teared letters under the little table,
and mother and ganfather and auntie didn't know him were there, and
ganfather said to mother somesing him couldn't understand--somesing
about _thit_ house, and mother said, yes, 'twould be a werry good thing
to go away 'fore the cold weather comed, and the children would be
p'eased. And auntie said she would like to tell the children, but----"

Another "inrumption." This time from Fritz.

"Baby, stop a minute," he exclaimed. "Celia, Denny--Baby's too little
to understand, but," and here Fritz's round chubby face got very red,
"don't you think we've no right to let him tell, if it's something
mother means to tell us herself? She didn't know Baby was there--he said
so."

But before Celia or Denny could answer, Baby turned upon Fritz.

"Him _tolded_ you not to inrumpt," he said, with supreme contempt. "If
you would litsen you would see. Mother _did_ know him was there at the
ending, for auntie said she'd like to tell the children--that's you, and
Denny and Celia--but him comed out from the little table and said _him_
would like to tell the children hisself. And mother were dedful
surprised, and so was ganfather and auntie. And then they all bursted
out laughing and told him lots of things--about going in the railway,
and in a 'normous boat to that other country, where there's cows to pull
the carts, and all the people talk lubbish-talk, like Lisa when she's
cross. And zen, and zen, him comed upstairs to tell you."

Baby looked round triumphantly. Celia and Fritz and Denny looked first
at him and then at each other. This was wonderful news--almost too
wonderful to be true.

"We must be going to Italy or somewhere like that," said Celia. "How
lovely! I wonder why they didn't tell us before?"

"Italy," repeated Denny, "that's the country like a boot, isn't it? I do
hope there won't be any snakes. I'd rather far stay at home than go
where there's snakes."

"_I_ wouldn't," said Fritz, grandly. "I'd like to go to India or Africa,
or any of those places where there's lots of lions and tigers and
snakes, and anything you like. Give me a good revolver and _you'd_ see."

"Don't talk nonsense, Fritz," said Celia. "You're far too little a boy
for shooting and guns and all that. It's setting a bad example to Baby
to talk that boasting way, and it's very silly too."

"Indeed, miss. Much obliged to you, miss," said Fritz. "I'd only just
like to know, miss, who it was came to my room the other night and was
sure she heard robbers, and begged Fritz to peep behind the swing-door
in the long passage. And 'oh,' said this person, 'I do so wish you had a
gun that you could point at them to frighten them away.' Fritz wasn't
such a very little boy just then."

Celia's face got rather red, and she looked as if she was going to get
angry, but at that moment, happily, Lisa appeared with the tray for the
nursery tea. She had left the room when the dormouse was caught, so she
had not heard the wonderful news, and it had all to be told over again.
She smiled and seemed pleased, but not as surprised as the children
expected.

"Why, aren't you surprised, Lisa?" said the children. "Did you know
before? Why didn't you tell us?"

Lisa shook her head and looked very wise.

"What country are we going to? Can you tell us that?" said Celia.

"Is it to your country? Is it to what you call Dutchland?" said Fritz.
"I think it's an awfully queer thing that countries can't be called by
the same names everywhere. It makes geography ever so much harder. We've
got to call the people that live in Holland Dutch, and they call
themselves--oh, I don't know what they call themselves----"

"Hollanders," said Lisa.

"Hollanders!" repeated Fritz. "Well, that's a sensible sort of name for
people that live in Holland. But _we've_ got to call them Dutch; and
then, to make it more muddled still, Lisa calls her country Dutchland,
and the people Dutch, and _we_ call them German I think it's very
stupid. If I was to make geography I wouldn't do it that way."

"What's jography?" said Baby.

"Knowing all about all the countries and all the places in the world,"
said Denny.

"Him wants to learn that," said Baby.

"Oh, you're _far_ too little!" said Denny. "_I_ only began it last year.
Oh, you're ever so much too little!"

"Him's not too little to go in the 'normous boat to _see_ all zem
countlies," said Baby, valiantly. "Him _will_ learn jography."

"That's right, Baby," said Fritz. "Stick up for yourself. You'll be a
great deal bigger than Denny some day."

Denny was getting ready an answer when Lisa, who knew pretty well the
signs of war between Fritz and Denny, called to all the children to come
to tea; and as both Fritz and Denny were great hands at bread and
butter, they forgot to quarrel, and began pulling their chairs in to the
table, and in a few minutes all four were busy at work.

What a pretty sight, and what a pleasant thing a nursery tea is! when
the children, that is to say, are sweet-faced and smiling, with clean
pinafores, and clean hands, and gentle voices; not leaning over the
table, knocking over cups, and snatching rudely at the "butteriest"
pieces of bread and butter, and making digs at the sugar when nurse is
not looking. _That_ kind of nursery tea is not to my mind, and not at
all the kind to which I am always delighted to receive an invitation,
written in very round, very black letters, on very small sheets of
paper. The nursery teas in Baby's nursery were not always _quite_ what I
like to see them, for Celia, Fritz, and Denny, and Baby too, had their
tiresome days as well as their pleasant ones, and though they meant to
be good to each other, they did not _always_ do just what they meant, or
really wished, at the bottom of their hearts. But to-day all the little
storms were forgotten in the great news, and all the faces looked bright
and eager, though just at first not much was said, for when children are
hungry of course they can't chatter quite so fast, and all the four
tongues were silent till at least one cup of tea, and perhaps three or
four slices of bread and butter each--just as a beginning, you know--had
disappeared.

Then said Celia,--

"Lisa, do tell us if you know what sort of a place we're going to."

"Cows pulls carts there," observed Baby; "and--and--what was the 'nother
thing? We'll have frogses for dinner."

"Baby!" said the others, "_what nonsense_!"

"'Tisn't nonsense. Ganfather said Thomas and Dones wouldn't go 'cos they
was fightened of frogses for dinner. _Him_ doesn't care--frogses tastes
werry good."

"How do you know? You've never tasted them," said Fritz.

"Ganfather said zem was werry good."

"Grandfather was joking," said Celia. "I've often heard him laugh at
people that way. It's just nonsense--Thomas and Jones don't know any
better. Do they eat frogs in your country, Lisa?"

"In mine country, Frulein Clie?" said Lisa, looking rather vexed. "No
indeed. Man eats goot, most goot tings, in mine country. Say, Herr
Baby--Herr Baby knows what goot tings Lisa would give him in her
country."

"Yes," said Baby, "such good tings. Tocolate and cakes--lots--and
bootiful soup, all sweet, not like salty soup. Him would like werry much
to go to Lisa's countly."

"Do cows pull carts in your country, Lisa?" asked Denny.

"Some parts. Not where mine family lives," said Lisa. "No, Frulein
Denny, it's not to mine country we're going. Mine country is it colt, so
colt; and your lady mamma and your lady auntie they want to go where it
is warm, so warm, and sun all winter."

"_I_ should like that too," said Celia, "I hate winter."

"That's 'cos you're a girl," said Fritz; "you crumple yourself up by the
fire and sit shivering--no wonder you're cold. You should come out
skating like Denny, and then you'd get warm."

"Denny's a girl too. You said it was because I was a girl," said Celia.

"Well, she's not as silly as some girls, any way," said Fritz, rather
"put down."

Baby was sitting silent. He had made an end of two cups of tea and five
pieces of bread and butter.

He was not, therefore, _quite_ so hungry as he had been at the
beginning, but still he was a long way off having made what was called
in the nursery a "good tea." Something was on his mind. He sat with one
arm propped on the table, and his round head leaning on his hand, while
the other held the piece of bread and butter--butter downwards, of
course--which had been on its way to his mouth when his brown study had
come over him.

  [Illustration: He sat with one arm propped on the table and his round
  head leaning on his hand, while the other held the piece of bread and
  butter--butter downwards, of course.--P. 16.]

"Herr Baby," said Lisa, "eat, mine child."

Baby took no notice.

"What has he then?" said Lisa, who was very easily frightened about her
dear Herr Baby. "Can he be ill? He eats not."

"Ill," said Celia. "No fear, Lisa. He's had ever so much bread and
butter. Don't you want any more, Baby? What are you thinking about?
We're going to have honey on our last pieces to-night, aren't we, Lisa?
For a treat, you know, because of the news of going away."

Celia wanted the honey because she was very fond of it; but besides
that, she thought it would wake Baby out of his brown study to hear
about it, for he was very fond of it too.

He did catch the word, for he turned his blue eyes gravely on Celia.

"Honey's werry good," he said, "but him's not at his last piece yet. Him
doesn't sink he'll _ever_ be at his last piece to-night; him's had to
stop eating for he's so dedful busy in him's head."

"Poor little man, have you got a pain in your head?" said his sister,
kindly. "Is that what you mean?"

"No, no," said Baby, softly shaking his head, "no pain. It's only busy
sinking."

"What about?" said all the children.

Baby sat straight up.

"Children," he said, "him zeally can't eat, sinking of what a dedful
packing there'll be. All of everysing. Him zeally sinks it would be best
to begin to-night."

At this moment the door opened. It was mother. She often came up to the
nursery at tea-time, and

   "When the children had been good;
   That is, be it understood,
   Good at meal times, good at play,"

I need hardly say, they were very, very pleased to see her. Indeed there
were times even when they were glad to see her face at the door when
they _hadn't_ been very good, for somehow she had a way of putting
things right again, and making them feel both how wrong and how _silly_
it is to be cross and quarrelsome, that nobody else had. And she would
just help the kind words out without seeming to do so, and take away
that sore, horrid feeling that one _can't_ be good, even though one is
longing so to be happy and friendly again.

But this evening there had been nothing worse than a little squabbling;
the children all greeted mother merrily, only Baby still looked rather
solemn.




CHAPTER II.

INSIDE A TRUNK

   "For girls are as silly as spoons, dears,
      And boys are as jolly as bricks.
       *       *       *       *       *
   Oh Mammy, _you_ tell us a story!--
      They won't hear a word that _I_ say."


"Mother, mother!" they all cried with one voice, and the three big ones
jumped up and ran to her, all pulling her at once.

"Mother, mother, do sit down in the rocking-chair and look comfortable,"
said Fritz.

"There's still some tea. You'll have a cup of _our_ tea, won't you,
mother?" said Celia.

"And some bread and honey," said Denny.

"It won't spoil your afternoon tea; don't say it will," said all
together, for nothing would ever make them believe that when mother came
up to the nursery at tea-time it could be allowed that she should not
have a share of whatever there was.

"Such a good thing we had honey to-night," said Celia, who was busy
cutting a very dainty piece of bread and butter. "We persuaded Lisa to
give it us _extra_, you know, mother, because of the news. And, oh,
mother, what do you think Baby says? he----"

"Baby! what is the matter with him?" interrupted mother.

They all turned to look at him. Poor Baby, he had set to work to get
down from his chair to run to mother with the others, but the chair was
high and Baby was short, and Lisa, who had gone to the cupboard for a
fresh cup and saucer for "madame," as she called the children's mother,
had not noticed the trouble Herr Baby had got himself into. One little
leg and a part of his body were stuck fast in the open space between the
bars at the back, his head had somehow got under the arm of the chair,
and could not be got out again without help. And Baby was far too proud
to call out for help as long as there was a chance of his doing without
it. But he really was in a very uncomfortable state, and it was a wonder
that the chair, which was a light wicker one, had not toppled over with
the queer way in which he was hanging. They got him out at last; his
face was very red, and I _think_ the tears had been very near coming,
but he choked them down, and looking up gravely he said to his mother,--

"Him's chair is getting too small. Him hasn't room to turn."

"Is it really?" said his mother, quite gravely too. She saw that Celia
and Fritz were ready to burst out laughing at poor Baby, and she didn't
want them to do so, for Baby had really been very brave, and now when he
was trying hard not to cry it would have been too bad to laugh at him.
"Is it really?" she said. "I must see about it, and if it is too small
we must get you another."

"Him doesn't want you to pack up _that_ chair," said Baby again, giving
himself a sort of shake, as if to make sure that his head, and his legs,
and all the rest of him, were in their proper places after being so
turned about and twisted by his struggles in the chair.

"He's quite in a fuss about packing," said Celia; "that's what I was
going to tell you, mother. He stopped in the middle of his tea to think
about it, and he said he thought we'd better begin to-night."

"Yes," said Baby. "There's such _lots_ to pack. All our toys, and the
labbits, and the mouses, and the horses, and the fireplaces, and the
tables, and the cups, and the saucers," his eyes wandering round the
room as he went on with his list. "Him thinks we'll need _lots_ of boats
to go in."

"And two or three railway trains all to ourselves," said mother.

Baby looked up at her gravely. He could not make out if mother was in
fun or earnest. His little puzzled face made mother draw him to her and
give him a kiss.

"It's a shame to talk nonsense to such a serious little man," she said.
"Don't trouble yourself about the packing, Baby dear. Don't you know
grandfather, and auntie, and I have had lots of packings to do in our
lives? Why, we had to pack up _two_ houses when we came away from India,
and that was much much farther away than where we're going now! And you
were _such_ a tiny baby then--it was very much harder, for mother was
very very sad, and she never thought you would grow to be a big strong
boy like what you are now."

"Was that when----" began thoughtless Denny, but Fritz gave her a tug.

"You _know_ it makes mother unhappy to talk about that time," he
whispered; but mother heard him.

"No, Fritz," she said; "I don't mind Denny thinking about it. I am so
glad to have all of you, dears, happy and good, that my sorrow is not so
bad as it was. And I am so glad you and Celia can remember your father.
Poor Baby--_he_ can't remember him," she said, softly stroking Baby's
face.

"'Cos he went to Heaven when him was so little," said Baby. Then he put
his arms round mother's neck. "Him and Fritz will soon grow big, and be
werry good to mother," he said. "And ganfather and auntie are werry good
to mother, isn't they?" he added.

"Yes indeed," said mother; "and to all of you too. What would we do
without grandfather and auntie?"

"Some poor little boys and girls has no mothers and ganfathers, and no
stockings and shoes, and no _nothings_," said Baby solemnly.

"There's _some_ things I shouldn't mind not having," said Fritz; "I
shouldn't mind having no lessons."

"O Fritz," said his sisters; "what a lazy boy you are!"

"No, I'm just _not_ lazy. I'm awfully fond of doing _everything_--I
don't even mind if it's a hard thing, so long as it isn't anything in
books," said Fritz, sturdily. "Some people's made one way, and some's
made another, and I'm made the way of not liking books."

"I wonder what Baby will say to books," said mother, smiling.

"Is jography in books," said Baby. "Him wants to learn jography."

"_I_ think it's awfully stupid," said Denny. "I'm sure you won't like it
once you begin. Did _you_ like lessons when you were little, mother?"

"Yes, I'm sure mother did," said Fritz. "People's fathers and mothers
were always far gooder than their children are. I've noticed that. If
ever big people tell you about when they were little, it's always about
how good they were. And they say always, 'Dear me, how happy children
should be nowadays; _we_ were never allowed to do so and so when _we_
were little.' That's the way old Mrs. Nesbitt always talks, isn't it
mother? I wonder if it's true. If people keep getting naughtier than
their fathers and mothers were, the world will get _very_ naughty some
day. _Is_ it true?"

"I think it's true that children get to be more spoilt," said Denny in a
low voice. "Just look how Baby's clambering all over mother! O Baby,
you nearly knocked over mother's cup! _I_ never was allowed to do like
that when _I_ was a little girl."

Everybody burst out laughing--even mother--but Denny had the good
quality of not minding being laughed at.

"Was the tea nice, and the bread and butter and honey?" she said
eagerly, as mother rose to put the empty cup in a place of safety.

"Very nice, thank you," said mother. "But I must go, dears. I have a
good many things to talk about with grandfather and auntie."

"Packing?" said Baby.

"How you do go on about packing!" said Denny. "Of course mother's not
going to pack to-night."

Baby's face fell.

"Him does so want to begin packing," he said dolefully. "'Appose we
forgottened somesing, and we was over the sea!"

"Well, I must talk about it all, and write down all we have to take,"
said mother. "So I must go to auntie now."

"Oh, not yet, not yet. Just five minutes more!" cried the children.
"And, mother," said Celia, "you've not answered my question. _Is_ it
true that children used to be so much better long ago? Were you never
naughty?"

"Sometimes," said mother, smiling.

"Oh, I'm so glad!" said Celia. "Often, mother? I do hope you were often
naughty. Do tell us a story about something naughty you did when you
were little. You know it would be a good lesson for us. It would show us
how awfully good one may learn to be, for, you know, you're awfully good
now."

"Yes, of course you are," said Fritz and Denny.

"Mother's _dedfully_ good," said Baby, poking up his face from her knee
where he had again perched himself, to kiss her. "Do tell him one story
of when you was a little girl, mother."

Mother's face seemed for a minute rather puzzled. Then it suddenly
cleared up.

"I will tell you a very little story," she said; "it really is a very
little story, but it is as long as I have time for just now, and it may
amuse you. Baby's packing put it in my head."

"Is it about when you were a little girl, mother?" interrupted Denny.

"Yes. Well, when I was a little girl, I had no mother."

The elder children nodded their heads. But Baby, to whom it was a new
idea, shook his sadly.

"Zat was a gate pity," he said. "Poor mother to have no mother. Had you
no shoes and stockings, and nothing nice to eat?"

"You sill----" began Denny, but mother stopped her.

"Oh yes," she said, "I had shoes and stockings, and everything I wanted,
for I had a very kind father. You know how kind grandfather is? And I
had a kind sister whom you know too. But when I was a little girl, my
sister was not herself _very_ big, and she had a great deal to do _for_
a not very big girl, you know. There were our brothers, for we had
several, and though they were generally away at school there seemed
always something to do for them--letters to write to them, if there was
nothing else--and then, in the holidays, there were all their new
shirts, and stockings, and things to get to take back to school. Helen
seemed always busy. She had been at school too, before your grandfather
came back from India, for five years, bringing me with him, quite a wee
little girl of four. And Helen was so happy to be with us again, that
she begged not to go back to school, and, as she was really very well
on for her age, grandfather let her stay at home."

"There, you see," whispered Celia, nudging Fritz. "It's beginning--it
always does--you hear how awfully good auntie was."

Mother went on quietly. If she heard what Celia said she took no notice.
"Grandfather let her stay at home and have lessons there. She had a
great many lessons to learn for her age besides those that one learns
out of books. She had to learn to be very active, and very thoughtful,
and, above all, very patient. For the little sister she had to take care
of was, I am afraid, a very spoilt little girl when she first came home.
Grandfather had spoiled her without meaning it; he was so sorry for her
because she had no mother, and Helen was so sorry for her too, that it
was rather difficult for her not to spoil her as well."

Here Baby himself "inrumpted."

"Him doesn't understand," he said. "Who _were_ that little girl? Him
wants a story about mother when _her_ was a little girl;" and the
corners of his mouth went down, and his eyes grew dewy-looking, in a
very sad way.

  [Illustration: There was one trunk which took my fancy more than
  all the others.--P. 30.]

"Poor Baby," said mother. "I'll try and tell it more plainly. _I_ was
that little girl, and auntie was my sister Helen. I must get on with my
little story. I was forgetting that Baby would not quite understand.
Well, one day to my great delight, Helen told me that grandfather was
going to take her and me and the two brothers, who were then at home, to
spend Christmas with one of our aunts in London. This aunt had children
too, and though I had never seen them Helen told me they were very nice,
for she knew them well, as she used to go there for her holidays before
we came home. She told me most about a little girl called Lilly, who was
just about my age. I had never had a little friend of my own age, and I
was always talking and thinking about how nice it would be, and I was
quite vexed with Helen because she would not begin to pack up at once. I
was always teasing her to know what trunks we should take, and if all my
dolls might go, and I am sure poor Helen often wished she had not told
me anything about it till the very day before. I got in the way of going
up to the big attic where the trunks were kept, and of looking at them
and wondering which would go, and wishing Helen would let me have one
all for myself and my dolls and their things. There was one trunk which
took my fancy more than all the others. It was an old-fashioned
trunk, but it must have been a very good one, for it shut with a sort of
spring, and inside it had several divisions, some with little lids of
their own, and I used to think how nice it would be for me, I could put
all my dolls in so beautifully, and each would have a kind of house for
itself. I don't remember how I managed to get it open, perhaps it had
been a little open when I first began my visits to the attic, for the
lid was very heavy, and I was neither big nor strong for my age. But it
_was_ open, and it stayed so, for no one else ever went up to the attic
but I. The other people in the house were too busy, and no one would
have thought there was anything amusing in looking at empty trunks in a
row. But I went up to the attic day after day. I climbed up the narrow
staircase as soon as I had had my breakfast, and stayed there till I
heard my nurse calling me to get ready to go out, or to come to my
lessons, for I was beginning to learn to read, and I used to have a
little lesson every day. And at last one day I said to my sister,

"'Helen, may I have the big trunk with the little cupboards in it for
_my_ trunk?'

"Helen was busy at the time, and I don't think she heard exactly what I
said. She answered me hurriedly that she would see about it afterwards.
But I went on teasing.

"'May I begin putting Marietta and Lady Regina into the little cupboards
inside?' I said.

"'Oh yes, I daresay you can if you like,' said Helen. She told me
afterwards that when I spoke of cupboards she never thought I meant a
trunk, she thought I was speaking of some of the nursery cupboards.

"It was just bed-time then, too late for me to go to the attic, for I
knew there was no chance of my getting leave to go up there with a
candle. But I fell asleep with my head full of how nicely I could put
the dolls into the trunk, each with her clothes beside her, and the very
first thing the next morning I got them all together and I mounted up to
the attic. I had never told nurse about my going up there. Once or
twice, perhaps, she had seen me coming down the stair, but very likely
she had thought I had only been a little way up to look out of a window
there was there. I don't know why I didn't tell her, perhaps I was
afraid of her stopping my going. I waited till she was busy about her
work, fetching coals and so on, and then I trotted off with Lady Regina
under one arm and Marietta under the other, and a bundle of their
clothes tied up in my pinafore before, to make my way upstairs to the
delightful trunk. It was open as usual, and after putting my dolls and
bundles down on the floor, I managed to lift out the two top trays. One
of them was much larger than the other, and it was in what I called the
cupboards below the smaller one that I settled to put Regina and
Marietta. There were two of these little cupboards, and each had a lid.
They would just do beautifully. Under the larger tray there was just one
big space without a lid, 'just a hole,' I called it. I went on for a
little time, laying in some of the clothes first to make a nice soft
place for the dolls to lie on, but I soon got tired. It was so very far
to reach over, for the outside edges of the box were high, higher of
course than the _inside_ divisions, for the trays I had taken out, which
lay on the top of the lower spaces, were a good depth, and there had
been no division between them. It came into my head that it would be
much easier if I were to get into the box myself--I could stand in the
big hole, as I called it, and reach over to the little divisions where I
wanted to put the dolls, and it would be far less tiring than trying to
reach over from the outside. So I clambered in--it was not very
difficult--and when I found myself really inside the trunk I was so
pleased that I sat down cross-legged, like a little Turk, to take a rest
before going on with what I called my packing. But sitting still for
long was not in my way--I soon jumped up again, meaning to reach over
for Lady Regina, who was lying on the floor beside the trunk, but, how
it happened I cannot tell, I suppose I somehow caught the tapes which
fastened the lid; any way down it came! It did not hurt me much, for I
had not had time to stretch out my head, and the weight fell mostly on
my shoulders, sideways as it were, and before I knew what had happened I
found myself doubled up somehow in my hole, with the heavy lid on the
top of me, all in the dark, except a little line of light round the
edge, for the lid had not shut quite down; the hasp of the lock--as the
little sticking-out piece is called--had caught in the fall, and was
wedged into a wrong place. So, luckily for me, there was still a space
for some air to come in, and a little light, though very little. I was
dreadfully frightened at first; then I began to get over my fright a
little, and to struggle to get out. Of course my first idea was to try
to push up the lid with my head and shoulders; I remember the feeling of
it pushing back upon me--the dreadful feeling that I couldn't move it,
that I was shut up there and couldn't get out! I was too little to
understand all at once that there could be any danger, that I might
perhaps be suffocated--that means choked, Baby--for want of air; or that
I might really be hurt by being so cramped and doubled up. And really
there was not much danger; if I had been older I should have been more
frightened than there was really any reason to be. But I was big enough
to begin very quickly to get very angry and impatient. I had never in
all my life been forced to do anything I disliked; often and often my
nurse, and sometimes Helen, had begged me to try to sit still for a
minute or two, but I never would. And now the lesson of having to give
in to something much worse than sitting still in my nice little chair by
the nursery fire, or standing still for two minutes while a new frock
was tried on, had to be learnt! There was no getting rid of it; I kicked
and I pushed, it was no use; the strong heavy lid which had been to
India and back two or three times would not move the least bit. I tried
to poke out my fingers through the little space that was left, but I
could not find the lock, and it was a good thing I did not, for if I had
touched the hasp, most likely the lid would have fallen quite into its
place, crushing my poor little fingers, and shutting me in without any
air at all. At last I thought of another plan. I set to work screaming.

"'Nurse, nurse, Nelly, oh Nelly,' I cried, and at last I shouted, 'Papa,
_Papa_, PAPA,' at the top of my voice. But it was no use! Most children
would have begun screaming at the very first. But I was not a
_frightened_ child, and I was very proud. I did not want any one to find
me shut up in a box like that, besides, they would be sure to stop my
ever coming up to the attic again. So it was not till I had tired myself
out with trying to push up the lid that I set to work to screaming, and
that made it all the more provoking that my calls brought no one. At
last I got so out of patience that I set to work again kicking for no
use at all, but just because I was so angry. I kicked and screamed, and
at last I burst into tears and _roared_. Then I caught sight, through
the chink, of Lady Regina's blue dress, where the doll was lying on the
floor near the trunk.

"'Nasty Regina,' I shouted, 'nasty, ugly Regina. You are lying there as
if there was nothing the matter, and it was all for you I came up here.
I hate dolls--they never do nothing. If you were a little dog you'd go
and bark, and then somebody would come and let me out.'

"Then I went on crying and sobbing till I was perfectly tired, and then
what do you think I did? Though I was so uncomfortable, all crushed up
into a little ball, I went to sleep! I went to sleep as soundly as if I
had been in my own little bed, and afterwards I found, from what they
told me, that I must have slept quite two hours. When I woke up I could
not think where I was. I felt so stiff and sore, and when I tried to
stretch myself out I could not, and then I remembered where I was! It
seemed quite dark; I wondered if it was night, till I noticed the little
chink of light at the edge of the lid, and then I began to cry again,
but not so wildly as before. All of a sudden I thought I heard a
sound--some one was coming upstairs! and then I heard voices.

"'Fallen out of the window,' one said. 'Oh no, nurse, she _couldn't_!
She could never get through.'

"But yet the person seemed to be looking out of the window all the same,
for I heard them opening and shutting it. And then I called out again.

"'Oh Nelly, Nelly. I'se here; I'se shut up in the big box with the
cupboards.'

"They didn't hear me at first. My little voice must have sounded very
faint and squeaky from out of the trunk, besides they were not half-way
up the attic-stairs. So I went on crying--

"'Oh Nelly, Nelly! I'se up here. Oh Nelly, Nelly!'

"She heard me this time. Dear Nelly! I never have called to her in vain,
children, in all my life. And in half a minute she had dashed up the
stairs, and, guided by my voice, was kneeling down beside the trunk.

"'Little May, my poor little May,' Nelly called out; and do you know I
really think she was crying too! I was--by the time Nelly and the
servants who were with her had got the lid unhooked and raised, and had
lifted me out--I was in floods of tears. I clung to Nelly, and told her
how 'dedful' it had been, and she petted me so that I am afraid I quite
forgot it was all my own fault.

"'You might have been there for hours and hours, May,' Nelly said to me,
'if it hadn't been for nurse thinking of the window on the stair. You
must never go off by yourself to do things like that,' and when I told
her that I had asked her and she had given me leave, she said she had
not at all known what I meant, and that I must try to remember not to
tease about things once I had been told to wait. Any way I think I had
got a good lesson of patience that day, and one that I never forgot, for
it really is not at all a pleasant thing to be shut up in a big trunk."

Mother stopped.

Baby, who had been listening with solemn eyes, said slowly,

"Him will not pack by hisself. Him will wait till somebody can help him.
It would be so dedful sad if him was to get shuttened up like poor
little mother, and perhaps you'd all go away ac'oss the sea and nebber
find him."

The corners of his mouth went down at this sorrowful picture, and his
eyes looked as if they were beginning to think about crying. But mother
and Celia set to work petting and kissing him before the tears had time
to come.

"As if we would ever go across the sea without _him_," said mother.

"Why, we should never know how to do _anything_ without Herr Baby," said
Celia.

"Fritz and Baby will do all the fussy things in travelling--taking the
tickets, and counting the luggage, and all that--they're such big men,
aren't they?" said Denny, with mischief in her twinkling green eyes.

"Now you, just mind what you're about," said Fritz, gallantly. "You'll
make him cry just when mother's been comforting him up. Such stupids
girls are!" he added in a lower voice.

"I really must go now," said mother, getting up from her chair. "Auntie
will not know what has become of me. I have been up here, why a whole
half hour, instead of five minutes!"

"Auntie will think mother's got shut up in a trunk again," said Denny,
whose tongue _never_ could be still for long, and at this piece of wit
they all burst out laughing.

All but Herr Baby. He couldn't see that it was any laughing matter.
Mother's story had sunk deep into his mind. Trunks were things to be
careful of. Baby saw this clearly.




CHAPTER III.

UP IN THE MORNING EARLY

   "Sweet, eager promises bind him to this,
      Never to do so again."


He woke early next morning. He had so much to think of, you see. So much
that even his dreams were full of all he had heard yesterday.

"Him's been d'eaming him was in the big, big, 'normous boat, and zen him
d'eamed of being shuttened up in a t'unk like _poor_ little mother," he
confided to Denny.

He was forced to tell Denny a good many things, because they slept in
the same room, and, of course, everybody knows that _whatever_ mammas
and nurses say, going-to-sleep-in-bed time is _the_ time for talking.
Waking-up-in-the-morning time is rather tempting, too, particularly in
summer, when the sun comes in at the windows _so_ brightly and the birds
are _so_ lively, chattering away to each other, and all the world is up
and about, except "_us_," who _have_ to stay in bed till seven o'clock!
Ah, it _is_ a trial! On the whole, I don't think chattering in the
mornings is so much to be found fault with as chattering at night. It is
only children who are so silly as to keep themselves awake when the time
for going to sleep has come. The birds and the bees, and the little
lambs even, all know when that time has come, and go to sleep without
any worry to themselves or other people. But children are not always so
sensible. I _could_ tell you a story--only I am afraid if she were to
read it in this little book it would make her feel so ashamed that I
should really be sorry for her, so I will not tell you her name nor
where she lives--of a little girl who was promised two pounds, two whole
gold pounds--fancy! if for one month she would go quietly to sleep at
night when she was put to bed, and let her sister do the same; and she
was to lose two shillings every night she forgot or disobeyed. Well,
what do you think? at the end of two weeks the two pounds had come down
already to nineteen shillings! She had forgotten already ten times, or
ten and a half times--I don't quite understand how it had come to
nineteen, but so it had; and at the end of the month--no I don't think
I will tell you what it had come down to. Only this will show you how
much more difficult it is to get out of a bad habit than to get into a
good one, for this little girl is very sweet and good in many ways, and
I love her dearly--_only_ she had got into this bad habit, and it was
stronger, as bad habits so often are, than her real true wish to do what
her mother told her.

But I have wandered away from Herr Baby, and I am afraid you won't be
pleased. He was forced, I was saying, to tell Denny a good many things,
because he was most with her. I don't think he would have told her as
much but for that, for Denny's head was a very flighty one, and she
never cared to think or talk about the same thing for long together,
which was not _at all_ Herr Baby's way. _He_ liked to think a good deal
about everything, and one thing lasted him a good while.

"Him's been d'eaming such a lot," he said to Denny this morning.

"I think dreams are very stupid," said Denny. "What's the good of them?
If they made things come _real_ they would be some good. Like, you know,
if I was to dream somebody gave me something awfully nice, and then when
I woke up I was to see the thing on my bed, _then_ dreams would be some
good."

"But if zou d'eamed somesing dedful, like being shuttened up in a t'unk
like _poor_ little mother, _zen_ it wouldn't be nice for it to come
zeal," said Baby, who never forgot to look at things from both sides.

"No, of course it wouldn't. How stupid you are!" said Denny. "And how
your head does run on one thing. I'm quite tired of you talking about
mother being shut up in the trunk. Do talk of something else."

"Him can't talk of somesing else when him's sinking of one sing," said
Baby gravely.

"Well, then don't talk at all," said Denny sharply, "and indeed I think
we'd better be quiet, or Lisa will be coming in, and scolding us. It's
only half-past six."

Baby did not speak for a minute or two. Then he said solemnly,

"When us goes away ac'oss the sea in the 'normous boat, him _hopes_ him
won't sleep in the same zoom as you any more."

"I'm sure I hope not," said Denny snappishly. There was some excuse for
her this morning, she was really rather sleepy, and it is very tiresome
to be wakened up at half-past six, when one is quite inclined to sleep
till half-past seven.

But Baby could not go to sleep again. His mind was still running on
packing. If he could but have a _little_ box of his own to pack his own
treasures in, then he would be sure none would be forgotten. He did not
want a _big_ trunk--not one in which he could be shuttened up like
mother, but just a nice little one. If mother would give him one!
Stay--where had he seen one, just what he wanted, was it in the nursery
or in the cupboard where Fritz kept his garden-tools and his skates, and
all the big boy things which Baby too hoped to have of his own some day?
No, it was not there. It must have been--yes, it was in the pantry when
he went to ask James for a glass of water. Up on a shelf, high up it
stood, "a tiny _sweet_ little t'unk," said Herr Baby to himself,
"wouldn't mother let him have it?" He would ask her this morning as soon
as he saw her. Then he lay still and thought over to himself all the
things he would pack in the tiny sweet little t'unk; his best Bible with
his name

 "Raymond Arthur Aylmer,"

in the gold letters on the back, should have the nicest corner, of
course, and his "_scented_ purse," as he called the Russia leather purse
which grandfather had given him on his last birthday, that would go
nicely beside the Bible, and his watch that _really_ ticked as long as
you turned the key in it--all those things would fit in, nicely packed
in "totton wool," of course, and crushy paper. The thought of it all
made Baby's fingers fidget with eagerness to begin his packing. If only
mother would give him the box! It must be mother's, for if it was
James's he would keep it in his own room instead of up on the pantry
shelf among all the glasses and cups. If Baby could just see it again he
would know 'ezackly if it would do!

Baby looked about him. Everything was perfectly still, he heard no one
moving about the house--Denny had said it was only half-past six.

"Denny," said Baby softly.

No reply.

"_Denny_," a very little louder.

Still no reply; but Baby, by leaning over the edge of his cot a little,
could see that Denny's eyes were shut, and her nose was half buried in
the pillow in the way she always turned it when she went to sleep. Denny
had gone to sleep again.

"Zes," said Herr Baby to himself; "her's a'leep--her's beazing so soft."

He looked about him again; he stuck one little warm white foot out of
bed--it did feel _rather_ cold; he felt more than half inclined just to
cuddle himself up warm again and lie still till Lisa came to dress him.
But the thought of the little t'unk was too much for him.

"Him would so like just to _see_ it," he said to himself.

Then he stood right up in bed and clambered over the edge of the cot the
way he had to do to get out of it by himself. He did not make much
noise--not enough to waken Denny, and indeed he would not much have
minded if she _had_ awakened, only that perhaps she would have wanted to
go too, and Baby wished just to go down to the pantry this quiet time of
the morning before any one was there and take a good look by himself.

It was cold on the stair--just at the edge, that is to say, where the
carpet did not cover, and where he had stepped without thinking, not
being used to trotting about on bare feet, you see. But in the middle,
on the carpet, it was nice and soft and warm.

"It would be dedful to be poor boys wif no shoes and stockings," he said
to himself, "'cept on the carpet. Him would like to buy lots of lubly
soft carpets for zem poor boys."

And he pitied the poor boys still more when he got to the back passage
leading to the pantry, where there was no carpet at all, only oilcloth.
He pattered along as fast as he could; there was no sound to be heard
but the ticking of the clock, and Baby wondered that he had never
noticed before what a loud ticking clock it was; it did not come into
his head that it was very late for none of the servants to be down, for
such matters were not his concern, and if he had known the truth that
Denny had made a mistake of an hour, and that it was only half-past five
instead of half-past six, he would not have thought much about it.

He got to the pantry at last. It was darker in here than in the passage
outside, which was a disappointment. The shutters were shut, that was
the reason, and when Baby looked up at them and saw how strong and
barred they were, even _he_ felt that it would be no use to try to open
them. He climbed up on to the dresser that ran round one side of the
wall to see better. Yes, there it was--the tiny, sweet, little
t'unk--just as he had been fancying it. Not so very high up either. If
he could but give it a little poke out he could almost reach it down--it
could not be heavy, it was _such_ a tiny t'unk; and, oh, if he could
carry it out to the passage, where it was light, how beautifully he
could look at it! He stood up on tiptoe, and found he could almost reach
it. A brush with a sticking-out handle was lying beside him. Baby took
it, and found that by poking it in a little behind the box he could make
it move out, and if it were moved out a very little way he could reach
to lift it down. He moved it out enough, then he stretched up his two
hands to lift it down--it was not very heavy, but still rather heavier
than he had thought. But with the help of his curly head, which he
partly rested it on, he got it out safely enough, and was just slipping
it gently downwards to the dresser when _somehow_ the brush handle,
which he had left on the shelf, caught him or the box, he could not tell
which, and, startled by the feeling of something pushing against him,
Baby lost his balance and fell! Off the dresser right down on to the
hard floor, which had no carpet even to make it softer, he tumbled, and
the little t'unk on the top of him. What a noise it made--even in the
middle of his fright Baby could not help thinking what a tremendous
noise he and the box seemed to make. He lay still for a minute; luckily
the box, though it had come straight after him, had fallen a little to
one side, and had not hit him. He was bruised enough by the floor
already--any more bumps would have been _too_ much, would they not? But
the poor box itself was to be pitied; it had come open in the fall, and
all that was in it had naturally tumbled out. _That_ explained the noise
and clatter. The box had held--indeed it had been made on purpose to
hold them--two beautiful glass jugs, which had been sent to mother all
the way from Italy! Baby had never seen them, because they were only
used when mother and auntie wanted the dinner-table to look very nice,
and of course Baby was too little ever to come down to dinner. And,
alas, the beautiful jugs, so fine and thin that one could almost have
thought the fairies had made them, were both broken, one of them,
indeed, crushed and shivered into mere bits of glass lying about the
pantry floor, and the box itself had lost its lid, for the hinges had
been broken, too, in the fall.

  [Illustration: For a minute or two Baby could not make out what had
  happened.--P. 50.]

For a minute or two Baby could not make out what had happened. He felt a
little stupid with the fall, and sore too. But he never was ready to cry
for bumps or knocks; he would cry much more quickly if any one spoke
sharply to him than if he hurt himself. So at first he lay still,
wondering what was the matter. Then he sat up and looked about him, and
_then_, seeing the broken box and the broken glass, he understood that
he had done some harm, and he burst into piteous sobbing.

"Him didn't mean," he cried; "him didn't know there was nuffin in the
tiny t'unk. Oh, what shall him do?"

He cried and sobbed, and, being now very frightened, he cried the more
when he saw that there was blood on his little white nightgown, and that
the blood came from one of his little cold feet, which had been cut by a
piece of the broken glass. Baby was much more frightened by the sight of
blood than by anything else--when he climbed up on the nursery chest of
drawers, and Denny told him he'd be killed if he fell down, he didn't
mind a bit, but when Lisa said that he might hurt his face if he fell,
and make it _bleed_, he came down at once--and now the sight of the
blood was too much.

"Oh, him's hurt hisself, him's all bleeding!" he cried. "Oh, _what_
shall him do?"

He dared not move, for he was afraid of lifting the cut foot--he really
did not know what to do--when he heard steps coming along the passage,
pattering steps something like his own, and before he had time to think
who it could be, a second little white-night-gowned figure trotted into
the room.

"Baby, poor Baby, what's the matter?" and, looking up, Baby saw it was
Fritz.

"Him's hurt hisself, him's tumbled, and the tiny t'unk is brokened, and
somesing else is brokened. Him didn't mean," he sobbed; and Fritz sat
down on the floor beside him, having the good sense to keep out of the
way of the broken glass, and lifted the little bleeding foot gently.

"Must have some sticking-plaster," said Fritz. "There's some in mother's
pocket-book in her room. We must go to mother, Baby."

"But him can't walk," said Baby piteously. "Him's foot bleedens dedful
when him moves it."

"Then I must carry you," said Fritz, importantly.

With some difficulty he got Baby on to his back and set off with him.
Baby had often ridden on Fritz's back before, in the nursery, for fun,
and it seemed very nice and easy. But now, though he had only his
nightgown on, Fritz was surprised to find how heavy he seemed after
going a little way. He was obliged to rest after he had gone up a few
steps, and Baby began to cry worse than before when he saw how tired
poor Fritz was. I really don't know how they ever got to the door of
mother's room, and, when their knocking brought her out, it was rather
a frightening sight for her--Baby perched on Fritz's back, both little
boys looking white and miserable, and the wounded foot covered with
blood.

But mother knew better than to ask what was the matter till she had done
something to put things to rights again.

"Him's foot" was the first thing Baby said, stretching out his poor
little toes.

And the foot looked so bad that mother felt quite thankful when she had
bathed it and found that the cut was not really a very deep one after
all. And when it was nicely plastered up, and both little boys were
tucked into mother's bed to get warm again, then mother had to hear all
about it. It was not much Fritz could tell. He, too, had wakened early,
and had heard Denny and Baby talking, for he slept in a little room near
theirs. He had fallen half asleep again, and started up, fancying he
heard a noise and a cry, and, getting out of bed, had found his way to
the pantry, guided by Baby's sobs. But what Baby was doing in the
pantry, or why he had wandered off there all alone so early in the
morning, Fritz did not know.

So Baby had to tell his own story, which he did straight on in his own
way. He never thought of _not_ telling it straight on; he was afraid
mother would be sorry when she heard about the "somesing" that was
broken, but it had never entered his little head that one could help
telling mother "ezackly" all about anything. And so he told the
whole--how he had been "sinking" about trunks and packing, and
"d'eaming" about them too, how Denny had been "razer c'oss" and wouldn't
talk, and how the thought of the tiny sweet t'unk had come into his head
all of itself, and he had fancied how nice it would be to go downstairs
and look at it on the pantry shelf, and then how all the misfortunes had
come. At the end he burst into tears again when he had to tell of the
"somesing brokened," now lying about in shiny fragments on the pantry
floor.

Poor mother! She knew in a minute what it was that was broken, and I
cannot say but that she was very sorry, more sorry perhaps than Baby
could understand, for she had had the pretty jugs many years, and the
thoughts of happy days were mingled with the shining of the rainbow
glass. Baby saw the sorry look on her face, and stretched up his two
arms to clasp her neck.

"Him is so sorry, so werry sorry," he said. "Him will take all the money
of him's money-box to buy more shiny jugs for mother."

Mother kissed him, but told him that could not be.

"The jugs came from a far-away country, Baby dear," she said, "and you
could not get them here. Besides, I cared for them in a way you can't
understand. I had had them a long time, and one gets to care for things,
even if they are not very pretty in themselves, when one has had them so
long."

"Oh ses, him does understand," said Baby. "Him cares for old 'sings, far
best."

"Yes," said Fritz, "he really does, mother. He cries when Lisa says she
must put away his old shoes, and his old woolly lamb is dreadful--really
dreadful, but he _won't_ give it away."

"It _has_ such a sweet face," said Baby.

"Well I don't care; I wish it was burnt up. He mustn't take it in the
railway with us when we go away; must he, mother?"

"Couldn't it be washed?" said mother.

"I don't think so, and I don't believe Baby would like it as much if it
was. Would you, Baby?" said Fritz.

Baby would not answer directly. He seemed rather in a hurry to change
the subject.

"Mother," he said, "when we go away in the 'normous boat, won't we
p'raps go to the country where the shiny jugs is made? And if him takes
all the money in him's money-box, couldn't him buy some for you?"

"They wouldn't be the same ones," said Fritz.

Baby's face fell. Mother tried to comfort him.

"Never mind about the jugs any more just now," she said. "Some day,
perhaps, when you are a big man you will get me some others quite as
pretty, that I shall like for your sake. What will please me more than
new jugs just now, Baby, is for you to promise me not to try to do
things like that without telling any one. Just think how very badly hurt
you might have been. If only you had waited to ask me about the little
box all would have been right, and my pretty jugs would not have been
broken."

"And mother told us that last night, you know, dear," said Fritz, in his
proper big brother tone. "Don't you remember in the story about her when
she was little? It all came of her not waiting for her big sister to see
about the trunk."

Baby gave a deep sigh.

"If God hadn't put so much 'sinking into him's head, it would have been
much better," he said. "Him 'sinks and 'sinks, and zen him can't help
wanting to do 'sings zat moment minute."

"Then 'him' must learn what _patience_ means," said mother with a little
smile. "But I'll tell you what _I've_ been thinking--that if we don't
take care somebody else may be hurting themselves with the broken glass
on the pantry floor."

"P'raps the cat," said Baby, starting up, "oh _poor_ pussy, if her was
to cut her dear little foots. Shall him go downstairs again, mother, to
shut the door? Why, him's foot's still _zather_ bleedy," he added,
drawing out the wounded foot, which had a handkerchief wrapped round it
above the plaster.

"No," said his mother, "it will be better for me to tell the servants
myself," so she rang the bell, and as it was now about the time that
Denny had thought it when Baby first woke up, in a few minutes her maid
appeared, looking rather astonished. She looked still more astonished,
and a little afraid too, when she caught sight of the two curly heads,
one dark and one light, on mother's pillow.

"Is there anything wrong with the young gentlemen?" she said. "Shall I
call Lisa, my lady?"

"No, not quite yet," said mother. "I rang to tell you to warn James and
the others that there is some broken glass on the pantry floor, and they
must be careful not to tread on it, and it must be swept up."

"Broken glass, ma'am," repeated the maid, who was rather what Denny
called "'quisitive." "Was it the cat? I did think I heard a noise early
this morning."

"No, it wasn't the cat," said mother. "It was an accident. James will
see what is broken."

The light curly head had disappeared by this time under the clothes, for
Baby had ducked out of sight, feeling ashamed of its being known that
_he_ had been the cat. But as soon as the maid had left the room he came
up again to the surface like a little fish, and a warm feeling of thanks
to his mother went through his heart.

"You won't tell the servants it were him, will you?" he whispered,
stretching up for another kiss.

"No, not if 'him' promises never to try to do things like reaching down
boxes for himself. Herr Baby must ask mother about things like that,
mustn't he?" she said.

Mother often called him "Herr Baby" for fun. The name had taken her
fancy when he was a very tiny child, and Lisa had first come to be his
nurse. For Lisa was _very_ polite; she would not have thought it at all
proper to call him "Baby" all by itself.

Herr Baby kissed mother a third time, which, as he was not a very
kissing person, was a great deal in one morning.

"Ses," he said, "him will always aks mother. Mother is so sweet," he
added coaxingly.

"He calls everything he likes 'sweet,'" said Fritz. "Mother and the cat
and the tiny trunk--they're all sweet.'"

But mother smiled, so Baby didn't mind.




CHAPTER IV.

GOING AWAY

  "She did not say to the sun good-night,
   As she watched him there like a ball of light,
   For she knew he had God's time to keep
   All over the world, and never could sleep."


How, I can't tell, but, after all, _some_how the packing got done, and
everything was ready. They left a _few_ things behind that Herr Baby
would certainly have taken had he had the settling of it. They didn't
take the horses, _nor_ the fireplaces, and, of course, as the horses
weren't to go, Thomas and Jones had to be left behind too to take care
of them, which troubled Baby a good deal. And no doubt Thomas and Jones
would have been _very_ unhappy if it hadn't been for the nice way Baby
spoke to them about coming back soon, and the letters he would send them
on their birthdays, and that he would never like any other Thomases and
Joneses as much as them. It was really quite nice to hear him, and
Jones had to turn his head away a little--Baby was afraid it was to hide
that he was crying.

It was a very busy time, and Baby was the busiest of any. There was so
much to think of. The rabbits too had to be left behind, which was very
sad, for one couldn't write letters to _them_ on their birthdays;
neither Denny, whom he asked about it, nor Baby himself, could tell when
the rabbits' birthdays were, and besides, as Baby said, "what would be
the good of writing them letters if they couldn't read them?" The only
thing to do was to get the little girl at the lodge to _promise_ to take
them fresh cabbages every morning--that was one of the things Herr Baby
had to see about, himself. Lisa lost him one morning, and found him at
the lodge, after a great hunt, talking very gravely to the little girl
about it.

  [Illustration: "Zou will p'omise, Betsy, p'omise certain sure, _nebber_
  to forget."--P. 61.]

"Zou will p'omise, Betsy, p'omise certain sure, _nebber_ to forget," he
was saying, and poor Betsy looked quite frightened, Herr Baby was so
very solemn. Fritz wanted to make her kiss her mother's old Testament,
the way he had seen men do sometimes in his grandfather's study when
they came to tell about things, and to promise they would speak the
truth; but Betsy, though she was ready enough to _promise_, didn't like
the other idea at all. She might be had up to the court for such like
doings, she said, and as neither Fritz nor Baby had any idea what sort
of place the court was, though they fancied it was some kind of prison
for people who didn't keep their word, they thought it better to leave
it.

The "calanies" and the "Bully" were to go, that was a comfort, and
Peepy-Snoozle and Tim, the two dormice, also, another comfort. Baby's
own packing was a serious matter, but, on the whole, I think mother and
Lisa and everybody were rather glad he had it to do, as it gave other
people a chance of getting _theirs_ done without the little feet
pattering along the passage or up the stairs, and the little shrill
voice asking what was going to be put into _this_ trunk or into _that_
carpet-bag. He gave up thinking so much about the other packing after a
while, for he found his own took all his time and attention. Mother had
found him a box after all. Not _the_ box of course--that was left empty,
by Baby's wish, till some day when he was a big man, he should go to the
country of the fairy glass and buy mother some new jugs--but a very nice
little box, and she gave him cotton wool and crushy paper too, and
everything was as neat as possible, and the box quite packed and ready,
the first evening. But it was very queer that _every_ day after that
Herr Baby found something or other he had forgotten, or something that
Denny and he decided in their early morning talks, that it would be
silly to take. Or else it came into his head in the night that his best
Bible would be better in the _other_ corner, and the scenty purse on the
top of it instead of at one side. Any way it always happened that the
box had to be unpacked and packed again, and the very last evening there
was Herr Baby on his knees before it on the floor, giving the finishing
touches, long after he should have been in bed.

"And we have to be up so early to-morrow morning," said mother, "my dear
little boy, you really _should_ have been fast asleep by this time."

"And he wakes me _so_ early in the morning," said Denny, who was
standing before the fire giving herself little cross shakes every time
poor Lisa, who was combing out her long fair hair, came to a tuggy bit.
"_Lisa_, you're _hurting_ me; _Lisa_, do take care," she added
snappishly.

"My dear Denny, how very impatient you are!" said her mother. "I don't
know how you will bear all the little discomforts of a long journey if
you can't bear to have your hair combed."

On this, Denny, as Fritz would have said, "shut up." She could not bear
it to be thought that she was babyish or "silly." Her great, great wish
was to be considered quite a big girl. You could get her to do anything
by telling her it would be babyish not to do it, or that doing it would
be like big people, which, of course, showed that she _was_ rather
babyish in reality, as sensible children understand that they cannot be
like big people in everything, and that they wouldn't be at all nice if
they were.

Baby always felt sorry for Denny or any of them when mother found fault
with them. He jumped up from the floor--at least he _got_ up, his legs
were too short for him to spring either up or down very actively--and
trotted across to his sister.

"Poor Denny," he said, reaching up to kiss her, "him won't wake her up
so early to-mollow morning."

"But we'll _have_ to wake early to-morrow," said Denny, rather crossly
still, "it's no use you beginning good ways about not waking me now,
just when everything's changed."

Baby looked rather sad.

"Is your box quite ready now, dear?" said his mother. "Well then, let
Lisa get you ready for bed as quick as she can, and you and Denny must
go to sleep without any talking, and wake fresh in the morning."

But Baby still looked sad; his face began working and twisting, and at
last he ran to mother and hid it in her lap, bursting into tears.

"Denny makes him so unhappy," he said. "Him doesn't like everysing to be
changed like Denny says. Him is so sorry to go away and to leave him's
house and Thomas and Jones, and oh! him is _so_ sorry to leave the
labbits!"

"And him's a tired little boy. I think it's because he's so tired that
he's so sad about going away," said mother. "Think, dear, how nice it is
that we're all going _together_, not Celia or Fritz or anybody left
behind. For you know Thomas has his old mother he wouldn't like to
leave, and Jones has his wife and children. And if the rabbits could
talk, I'm quite sure they would tell you that they'd far rather stay
here in their own nice little house, with plenty of cabbages, than be
bundled into a box and taken away in the railway ever so far, without
being able to run about for ever so many days."

Baby's face cleared a little.

"Betsy has p'omised," he said to himself. Then he added, "_Him_ won't
like the railway neither if it's like that."

"But _him's_ not going to be put in a box or a basket," said mother,
laughing. "Him will have a nice little corner all to himself in a
cushioned railway carriage, only just now he really _must_ go to bed."

So she kissed him for good-night, and Denny too, who, by this time, had
recovered her good-humour in the interest of listening to the
conversation between her mother and Herr Baby, and soon both little
sister and brother were fast asleep in their cots, dreaming about the
journey before them I daresay, or perhaps forgetting all about it in the
much queerer and stranger journeys that small people are apt to fly away
upon at night, when their tired little bodies _seem_ to be lying quite
still and motionless in bed.

It was strange enough--_almost_ as strange as a dream--the next morning
when, long before it was light, they had all to get up and be dressed at
once in their going-out things--that is to say their thick boots and
gaiters, and woollen under-jackets (for it was very cold, though not yet
far on in November), while their ulsters and comforters and caps, and
the girls' sealskin coats and muffs and hats, were all laid out in four
little heaps by Lisa, so that they should be ready to put on the moment
breakfast was over.

What a funny breakfast! Candles on the table, for it was not, of course,
worth while to light the lamp, and everything looking more like a sort
of "muddley tea," Fritz said, than their usual trim nursery breakfast.

"I can't eat," said Fritz, throwing down his bread and butter; "it's no
use."

"And there's eggs!" said Denny, who was comfortably at work at hers,
looking across at Fritz as if it wouldn't be very difficult to eat up
his egg too. "I think it's very kind of cook to have got up so early and
made us eggs 'cos we were going away, and----"

"'Twasn't cook, 'twas Abigail," said Fritz. "I saw her coming up with
the eggs all in a pan with hot water, so that they shouldn't get cold,
she said to Lisa."

"Well then it was very kind of Abigail, and----" said Denny.

"'Twasn't Abigail that made the eggs," said Baby, "'twas the hens zat
laid them. Denny should say the _hens_ was werry kind."

"Oh bother," said Denny, "I wish you'd not interrupt me. I don't care
who it was. I only want to say it's very stupid of Fritz not to eat his
egg, when _somebody_ made them for us, extra you know, because we're
going away, and I think Fritz is very stupid."

"Come, Herr Fritz," said Lisa, encouragingly, "try and eat. You will be
so hungry."

"I can't," said Fritz, "I've got a horrid feeling just like when mother
took me to have that big tooth out. I feel all shaky and cruddley."

"Yes, _I_ know," said Denny, going on with _her_ breakfast all the same,
"but eating's the best thing to make it go away. I felt just that way
the day I broke grandfather's hotness measure, and mother said I must
tell him myself. I couldn't eat a bit of dinner, and I sat on the stair
all _screwged_ up, waiting for him to go to the study."

"How dedful!" said Baby, with great feeling. But neither Fritz nor Celia
seemed to think much of Denny's sufferings. No one had ever seen her
nerves disturbed, and they did not therefore much believe in her having
any.

"Grandfather's _what_ did you say?" asked Celia.

"His hotness measure--the little glass pipe thing with a blob that goes
up and down. He's got another now, you know."

"You mean his thermometer; you really should learn the proper names of
things," said Celia, "you're quite big enough."

Denny would probably not have taken this in good part, though the "quite
big enough" at the end was very much to her taste, but there was no time
_this_ morning for squabbling.

"Quick, quick, mine children," said Lisa, "the cart with the luggage is
'way, and the Herr Grandpapa is buttoning his coat."

"And Fritz hasn't eaten his egg!" said Denny, eyeing it dolefully, as
Lisa was fastening her jacket.

"I _couldn't_," said Fritz. "There'll be sandwiches or something in the
train--sure to be. Now come on; let's see what have I got to look after.
Only Tim and Peepy-Snoozle. I _couldn't_ lose my satchel, you see, for
its strapped on me. Much more sensible than _girls_, who have to carry
their bags over their arms."

And Fritz, in a new ulster, very long and rather stiff, and feeling, to
tell the truth, a little uncomfortable at first, as new things generally
do, stalked off--I don't think he _could_ have run!--with the air of a
very big man indeed.

Celia and Denny had a slight dispute as to which was which of the
bird's cages. For it had been settled that, for the journey at least,
the canaries were to be Celia's charge and the "Bully" Denny's, though,
hitherto, these three little birds had belonged to all the children
together.

"You've got my cage, Denny," said Celia, sharply.

"I haven't," said Denny, holding hers the more tightly. It was not very
easy to see, for both were covered up with dark blue stuff wrappers, to
keep the birds warm, "and to make them think it's night all the way,"
said Baby.

"I haven't," repeated Denny, "there, don't you see _two_ yellow tails in
yours? Peep through."

And Denny proved to be right, so Celia had to give in.

And at last they were off! The drive to the station safely over without
any misadventures, the luggage all locked up in the van, the children
and the dormice and the birds--far more important things, of course,
than the big people!--all comfortably settled at one end of the nice big
saloon carriage, which grandfather had had sent down on purpose from
London.

"Dear me," said Denny, jigging up and down on her seat, "so we're really
off! How nice and springy these cushions are! And this carriage is as
big as a little house. I could _never_ be tired of travelling in a
carriage like this."

"Him zought we'd _nebber_ get away," said Baby, with his usual
solemnity. "Dear, dear, what dedful lots of boxes there is! Him's box is
'aside the 'normous big straw one; did zou know, Denny?"

"Poor grandfather," said Celia, "_what_ a lot of times he said over,
'three black portmanteaux, four, no five canvas-covered, four carpet
bags, one--fourteen in all. Is _that_ right, Helen? Grandfather's
something like Baby, he thinks no one can do anything right but himself;
and there's Peters come on purpose to bother about these things."
(Peters was grandfather's own servant.) "I wish grandfather wouldn't
fuss so. I hate people to think he's a fussy old man, something like Mr.
Briggs in Punch. As if he had never travelled before!"

As may be imagined, these remarks of Celia's were made in a low voice,
for, of course, they were intended for the nursery party alone. Fritz
flew up in grandfather's defence.

"Very fine, Miss Celia," he said. "You may laugh at grandfather for
fussing, but _suppose_ he didn't, and _suppose_ that when we get to--oh,
bother, I can't say those French names--wherever it is we're going to,
_suppose_ that Madamazelle Celia's trunk was lost, and Madamazelle Celia
hadn't any best frocks or flounces, or Sunday hats, how would
Madamazelle Celia look _then_? Perhaps she'd wish then that grandfather
had fussed a little."

Celia turned to look for her bag, and having found it, she took out the
book which she had brought with her to read on the way.

"You're too silly to speak to, Fritz," she said; "I'm going to read."

"So am I," said Denny, who had likewise armed herself with a book,
though she was rather a dunce for her age, and couldn't read "runningly"
as French people say. But _big_ people always had books to read in the
railway--that was enough for Denny, of course, to try to do so too.

"_I'm_ going to take a nap, then," said Fritz, who was really looking
rather white and tired. He had been wakened out of a very sound sleep
this morning, and had not been able to eat any breakfast. Lisa thought
that taking a nap was the best thing he could do, so she got down a
bundle of the rugs to make him a pillow, and helped him to tuck up his
legs comfortably, and Fritz settled himself for his little sleep, making
Lisa promise to waken him when they came to a big station.

So everybody seemed inclined to be quiet. Herr Baby's corner was by the
window. He looked about him. Celia and Denny were buried in their books,
Fritz seemed asleep already; of the big people at the other end,
grandfather's face was quite hidden in his newspaper, which he had kept
over from last night on purpose to have something to read in the train,
knowing that they would start before the postman came in the morning,
and mother and auntie were talking together, softly, not to disturb him.

"Should you like the window more open?" said grandfather, suddenly
looking up.

"No, thank you," said auntie. "I think that little chink is enough. It
is really very cold this morning."

"How good the children are!" said mother. She spoke in a lower voice
than auntie; but Baby heard her, for he had quick ears. "One could
almost fancy they were all asleep."

"Yes," said auntie, "if it would last all the way to Santino, or even to
Paris!"

"Or even to London!" said mother. "But they'll all be jumping about like
grasshoppers before long."

Then they went on talking softly again about other things; and Baby
didn't hear, and didn't care to hear. Besides, he had already been
taught a lesson that boys and girls cannot learn too young, which is,
that to listen to things you are not meant to hear is a _sort_ of
cheating, for it is like taking something not meant for you. Of course,
while auntie and mother were talking in a louder voice he could not help
hearing, and it was no harm to listen, as if they had minded his hearing
they would have spoken more in a whisper.

Baby turned to his window to amuse himself by looking out. First he
tried to count the telegraph wires, but he could never be sure if there
were eight or nine--he had not yet learnt to count higher than ten--for
the top ones were so tiresome, they danced away out of sight, and all of
a sudden danced down again, and sometimes they seemed to join together,
so that he could not tell if they were one or two. He wondered what made
them wave up and down so; whether there were men down in the ground
that pulled them, and what they did it for; he had heard of "sending
telegrams," and Denny had told him it meant sending messages on wires,
but he did not know that these were the wires used for that. He fancied
these wires must have something to do with the railway; perhaps they
were to show the people living in the fields that the trains were
coming, so that they shouldn't get in the way and be "runned over."
This made Baby begin to think of the people living in the fields; they
were just then passing a little cottage standing all by itself. It
looked a nice cottage, and it had a sort of little garden round it, and
some cocks and hens were picking about. Baby looked back at the little
cottage as long as he could see it; he wondered who lived in it, if
there were any little boys and girls, and what they did all day. He
wondered if they went to school, or if perhaps they sometimes went
messages for their mother, and if they weren't frightened if they had
to pass through the wood, which by this time the train was running
along the edge of. Could this be Red Riding Hood's wood, perhaps? Baby
shuddered as this idea came into his mind. Or it might be the wood that
Hop-o'-my-thumb and his six brothers had to make their way through,
where the birds _would_ pick the crumbs they dropped to show the path.
It would be very "dedful" for seven little boys to be lost in a wood
like that, and still worse for one little boy all alone. Baby was very
glad that when little boys had to go through woods _now_ it was in nice
railway carriages with mothers and aunties and everybodies with them.
But even in this way the wood made him feel a _very_ little frightened;
just then it got so much darker. He looked up to see if they were all
still reading or asleep; he _almost_ thought he would ask Lisa to take
him on her knee a little, when, all of a sudden, the "railway," as he
called it, screamed out something very sharp and loud, the rattle and
the noise got "bummier" and yet sharper; Baby could see no trees, no
fields, "no nothing." What could it be? It was worse than the wood.

"Oh, Lisa," cried poor Herr Baby, "the railway horses must have runned
the wrong way. We's going down into the cellars of the world."

Lisa caught him up in her arms and comforted him as well as she could.
It was only a tunnel, she told him, and she explained to him what a
tunnel was, just a sort of passage through a hill, and that there was
nothing to be frightened at. And she persuaded him to look up and see
what a nice little lamp there was at the top of the carriage, on purpose
to light them up while they were in the dark. Baby was quite pleased
when he saw the little lamp.

"Who put it 'zere?" he said. "Were it God?"

He was rather disappointed when Lisa told him that it was the railway
men who put it up, but then he thought again that it was very kind of
the railway men, and that it must have been God who taught them to be
so kind, which Lisa quite agreed in. But even though the little lamp
was very nice, Baby was very pleased to get out of the tunnel, and out
of the rumbly, rattly noise, into the open daylight again, with the
beautiful sun shining down at them out of the sky. For the day was
growing brighter as it went on, and the air was a little frosty, which
made everything look clear and fresh.

"Nice sun," said Baby, glancing up at his old friend in the sky, "that's
the bestest lamp of all, isn't it? and it _were_ God put it up there."

After that he must, I think, have taken a little nap in Lisa's arms
almost without knowing it, for he didn't seem to hear anything more or
to think where he was or anything, till all of a sudden he heard
mother's voice speaking.

"Won't Baby have a sandwich, Lisa? And Denny, why, have you been asleep
too, Denny?"

And sitting up on Lisa's knee, all rosy and dimpled with sleeping, his
fair curls in a pretty tumble about his eyes, Baby saw Denny, looking
very sleepy too, but trying hard to hide it.

"Oh," she said, smoothing down her hair and sitting up very straight,
"I've been reading such a long time that my eyes got quite tired; that
was why I shut them."

"Oh indeed!" said mother, but Baby could see that she was smiling at
Denny, though she didn't laugh right out like Fritz and Celia.

They were all very happy, however, with their sandwiches and buns, and
after they had eaten as much as they wanted, auntie taught them a sort
of guessing game, which helped to pass the time, for already Denny and
Fritz were beginning to think even the big saloon carriage rather a
small room to spend a whole day in.

They passed two or three big stations, and then they were allowed to get
out and walk up and down the platform a little, which was a nice change.
But Baby was so dreadfully afraid of any of them being left behind that
he could hardly be persuaded to get out at all, and once when he and
Lisa were waiting alone in the carriage while the others walked about,
and the train moved on a little way to another part, he screamed so
loudly--

"Oh, mother, oh, auntie, oh, ganfather, and Celia, and Fritz, and Denny!
All, all is left behind!"--that there was quite a commotion in the
station, and when the train moved back again, and they all got in, he
was obliged to kiss and hug each one separately, several times over,
before he could feel quite sure he had them all safe and sound, and
that "not nobody" was missing.

It seemed a long time after it got dark, even though the little lamp was
still lighted. But it was not light enough to see to read, and "the big
lamp up in the sky," as Baby said, "was _kite_ goned away." It puzzled
him very much how the sun could go away every night and come back every
morning, and the queerest thing of all was what Celia had told him--that
"away there," in the far-off country where they were going, there would
still be the same sun, the _very_ same sun, that they had seen every
morning peeping up behind the kitchen-garden wall, and whose red face
they had said good-night to on the winter evenings, as he slipped away
to bed down below the old elms in the avenue, where the rooks had their
nests. Somehow as Baby sat in his corner, staring out now and then at
the darkness through which they were whizzing, blinking up sometimes at
the little lamp shining faintly in the roof, there came before his mind
the pictures of all they had left behind; he seemed to see the garden
and the trees _so_ plain, and he thought how very, very quiet and lonely
it must seem there now, and Baby's little heart grew sad. He felt so
sorry for all the things they had left--the rabbits and the pussy most
of all, of course, but even for the dear old trees, and the sweet,
"denkle" flowers in the garden; even for the tables and chairs in the
house he felt sorry.

"Him's poor little bed will be so cold and lonely," he said to himself.
"Him sinks going away is _werry_ sad."




CHAPTER V.

BY LAND AND SEA

   "So the wind blew softly,
      And the sun shone bright."


Grandfather had fixed that it would be best to go straight through at
once to the seaport, where, the next morning, they would find the
'normous boat waiting to take them over the sea. They had to pass
through London on the way, and, by the time they got to the big London
station, Baby was very tired--so white and quiet that mother was a
little frightened.

"I almost wish," she said, "that we had fixed to stay all night in
London. Baby has never had a long railway journey before, since he was a
_real_ Baby, you know, and he is not very strong."

She was speaking to auntie. It was just when they were getting near the
big London station. Auntie looked at Baby. He was lying on Lisa's knee
with his eyes shut, as if he were asleep, but he wasn't. He heard what
they said, and he was rather pleased at them talking about him. In
_some_ ways he was very fond of being made a fuss about.

"He does look a little white shrimp," said auntie. "But then you know,
May, he is so fair. He looks more quickly white if he is tired than
other children. And he has been such a good little man all day--not one
bit of trouble. He is really a capital traveller--_ever_ so much quieter
than the others."

She said these last few words in a low tone, not caring for the other
children to hear; but if she had spoken quite loud I don't think they
would have heard, and, indeed, it seemed as if they wanted to show that
auntie's words were true; for just at that moment there came such a
scream from Denny that everybody started up in a fright.

What _could_ be the matter? everybody asked.

"It's all Denny," said Fritz, in a great fuss.

"It's not; it's all Fritz and Celia," said Denny.

"It's both of them," said Celia. "Mother, I wish you wouldn't let them
be near each other. Denny put her hand into the dormice's cage when
Fritz wasn't looking, and she poked out Tim, who was just beginning to
come awake for the night, and she as nearly as _could_ be got his tail
pulled off, and then, when Fritz caught her, she screamed."

"Fritz snipped my hand in the little door of the cage," sobbed Denny.
"And Celia always takes Fritz's part."

Celia was beginning; to "answer back," when auntie stopped her by a
look--the children were sometimes rather afraid of auntie's "looks."

"Dear me, young people," said grandfather from his end of the carriage,
"you might be peaceable for five minutes, and then we shall be in
London, and you shall have a good tea before we go on again."

The children all grew quiet. They were glad to hear of tea, and they
were a little ashamed of themselves. Auntie moved over to their end of
the carriage.

"Him would like some tea too, p'ease," said Baby, as she passed him, and
auntie patted his head.

"They are all tired, I suppose," said mother; "but it really is too
silly, the way they quarrel about nothing."

"Auntie," said Celia softly, "I think it was partly my fault. Denny and
Fritz asked me to tell them a story, and I wouldn't. It would have kept
them quiet."

"Well, never mind now," said auntie. "You must all try and be very good
to-morrow. This is only the first day, you know. You can't be expected
to be very clever travellers yet. And the very first lesson to learn in
travelling is--do you know what?"

"Not to lose your things?" said Celia.

"To be ready in time?" said Fritz.

"To sit still in the railway?" said Denny, rather meekly.

"All those are very good things," said auntie; "but they're not _the_
thing I was thinking of. It was _to keep your temper_."

The children got rather red, but I don't think any one noticed, for
already the train was slackening, and in another minute or two they all
got out and were standing together on the bustling platform, dimly
lighted up by the gas lamps, which looked yellow and strange in the
foggy air of a London November evening.

"Is zit London?" said Baby, and when Celia said "yes," he added rather
mournfully, "Him doesn't sink London's pitty at all."

  [Illustration: Poor little boys, for after all, Fritz himself wasn't
  very big! They stood together hand in hand on the station platform,
  looking, and feeling, rather desolate.--P. 84.]

Poor little boys, for, after all, Fritz himself wasn't very big! They
stood together hand in hand on the station platform, looking, and
feeling, rather desolate. Lisa was busy helping with the rugs and
bags that had been in the carriage; mother and auntie, as well as
grandfather and Peters and the maid, were all busy about the luggage.

"Stay there a moment, children," said somebody; but Denny had no idea of
staying anywhere. Off she trotted to have a look at the luggage too, and
Celia was half inclined to follow her, when her glance fell on her two
little brothers.

"Celia," said Baby, catching hold of her, "don't go away too. Fritz is
taking care of him, but we _might_ be lostened."

He spoke rather timidly, and Celia's heart was touched. She was a good
deal older than the others--nearly twelve--Fritz and Denny were very
near in age, and sometimes Celia was a little cross at mother for not
making difference enough, as she thought, and for keeping her still a
good deal in the nursery. Mother had her own good reasons, and it is not
always wise for big people to tell children their reasons, as Celia got
to know when she grew wiser and bigger herself. She sometimes spoke
rather crossly to the younger ones, and it made them a very little
afraid of her, but in her heart she was kind. Just now she stooped down
to kiss Baby.

"Don't be frightened, poor old man," she said, "you won't be lost. Fritz
wouldn't let you be lost, would you, Fritz?"

Fritz brightened up at that, as Celia had meant he should. He, too, had
been feeling a little strange and queer--the long journey and the
sleeping in the day, all so different from their life at home, had
rather upset him--but he would not have liked to say so! And now he was
quite pleased at Celia telling Baby that, of course, Fritz was big
enough to take care of him. It is so easy for children--bigger ones
above all--to please each other and give nice feelings, when they really
try to feel _with_ each other and _for_ each other.

The little boys looked much happier a few minutes later, when they were
seated at tea in a comfortable corner of the refreshment room.
Grandfather had sent Peters on, as soon as they had got the luggage all
safe, to see that a table was placed for them by themselves. He,
himself, went off to get some real dinner, for, of course, it was not to
be expected that a gentleman, and especially an _old_ gentleman, would
be contented with tea, and bread and butter, and buns, however nice,
but, to the children's great pleasure, mother and auntie said _they_
would far rather stay and have tea with the little people.

"It is a good thing, isn't it, for them to stay with us?" said Fritz to
Celia, confidentially, "for we are none of us _very_ big, are we? And
you know we _might_ get lost somehow, as Baby says, though I wouldn't
say so to him for fear of frightening him, you know."

"No, of course not," said Celia, and looking up she was pleased to see
mother smiling at her. Mother saw that Celia was trying to be kind and
helpful, and she did so like to see the way the little ones clung to
Celia when she was gentle. Mother must have been something like Baby in
her mind, I think, for when she looked at the boys sitting there in the
strange, big station-room, their little faces grave and rather tired
looking, a sort of sorry feeling came over _her_ too, as she thought of
the snug, cosy nursery at home, and the neat nursery tea, with the
pretty pink and white cups she had chosen, and the canaries and "Bully"
twittering in the window. Poor "calanies" and poor Bully! they didn't
know where they had got to! They had slept nearly all day, thinking, as
they were meant to think, that it was night, I suppose, but now they
must have given up thinking so, for they were fidgeting about in their
cages in an unhappy, restless sort of way. They had plenty of seed, and
Celia and Lisa took care that they should have fresh water, but still,
poor little things, they were not very happy.

"Going away from their own home is really a trial for children," thought
mother. She was a little tired herself, and being tired makes
_everything_ seem the wrong way.

But there was no help for it. They had all to make the best of things,
and to set off again in another train and be rattled away to the sea. It
was quite dark by now, of course, and it seemed very queer to start on
another journey with so little rest between. I think, however, once they
were all settled in the railway carriage, that the children slept the
most of the way; Baby, at any rate, knew nothing more till he woke up to
find himself in Lisa's arms, with a cold, fresh air--the air of the
sea--blowing in his face, and making him lift up his head and look about
him.

"Where is him?" he said. "Is him in the 'normous boat?"

"Not so, Herr Baby," said Lisa. "He shall first be undressed and have a
nice sleep all night in bed, to rest him well. Lie still, mine child,
and Lisa will keep you warm."

"Him likes the wind," said Baby. "It blowed his eyes open; him is quite
awake now," and he tried to sit straight up in Lisa's arms.

"Oh, Herr Baby, I cannot hold you so," said Lisa.

"There is such a little way to go," said his mother, who was just
behind, "lie still, dear, as Lisa tells you."

"Him would like to walk, him's legs is so 'tiff," said Baby. "P'ease let
him walk if it's such a little way!"

His voice was so piteous that mother told Lisa to let him walk; they
were going from the station to the hotel, a very little way, as mother
had said. Lisa put Baby down on the ground; at first he really tumbled
over, his legs felt so funny, but with Lisa's hand he soon got his
balance again. It was a very dark night; they could not have seen their
way but for the lights of the station and the town.

"What a dark countly zit is!" said Herr Baby. "Is there no moon in zit
countly? Denny says in her hymn 'the moon to shine by night,' is there
no moon 'cept in him's own countly?"

"What are you chattering about, little man?" said auntie.

"He's asking about the moon, auntie; he wants to know if there isn't
any moon here. He thinks we've left it behind at home," said Denny.

A sort of roar from poor Baby interrupted her.

"Oh, Denny, don't, _don't_ say that," he cried, "it makes him sink of
the labbits, and Thomas, and Jones, and the trees, and the flowers, and
him's dear little bed, and all the sings we'se leaved behind. Him
doesn't like you to speak of leaved behind."

"_Poor_ Baby," said Denny, "I'm so sorry." She stooped down to kiss him,
but it was so dark it wasn't easy to find his mouth, and she only
managed to kiss the tip of his nose, which was as cold as a little
dog's. This made Herr Baby begin laughing, which was a good thing,
wasn't it? And he was so taken up in explaining to Lisa how funny it
felt when Denny kissed his nose, that he had not time to think of his
sorrows again till they were at the foot of the large flight of steps
leading up to the big hotel where they were to sleep.

"Nice big house," said Baby, looking round; and as he caught sight of
some of the waiters running about, he asked Lisa if "them was new
servants instead of Thomas and Jones."

"Him likes Thomas and Jones best," he went on, the corners of his mouth
going down again, so that Lisa was obliged to assure him the servants
were not going to be _instead_ of Thomas and Jones, they were all only
just going to stay one night at this big house, and to-morrow they would
set off in the great ship to cross the sea.

The mention of the ship fortunately gave a new turn to Baby's thoughts;
and he allowed Lisa to take him upstairs and warm him well before a good
fire before she undressed him and put him to bed. The other children
thought it great fun to sleep in strange rooms, in beds quite unlike
those they had at home, and to have to hunt for their nightgowns and
brushes and sponges in two or three _wrong_ carpet bags before they came
to the right one; but Baby's spirits were rather depressed, and it was
not easy to keep him from crying in the sad little way he had when his
feelings were touched.

"He is tired, poor little chap," said auntie, as she kissed him for
good-night. "It is ever so much later than he has ever been up before.
It is nearly ten."

"Him _were_ up till ten o'clock on Kissmass," said Herr Baby,
brightening up. "Him were up _dedful_ late, till, till, p'raps till near
twenty o'clock."

Auntie would have liked to laugh, but she took care not, for when Baby
was in this sort of humour there was no telling whether other people's
laughing might not make him take to crying, so she just said,

"Indeed! That must have been _very_ late; well, go to sleep now, and
sleep till twenty o'clock to-morrow morning, if you like. We don't need
to start early," she added, turning to Lisa; and I think poor Lisa was
not sorry to hear it!

If I were to go on telling you, bit by bit, all about the journey, and
everything that happened big and little, it would take a good while, and
I don't know that you would find it very interesting. Perhaps it is
better to take a jump, as people do in real big story books, and to go
on with Herr Baby's adventures a few days later, when he, and Denny, and
Fritz, and Celia, and Lisa, and mother, and auntie, and grandfather, and
the "bully," and the "calanies," and Tim, and Peepy-Snoozle, and Linley,
mother's maid, and Peters, grandfather's man, and I forget if there was
any one else, but I think not; and all the boxes and carpet-bags, and
railway-rugs, were safely arrived at Santino, the pretty little town
with mountains on one side and the sea on the other, where they were all
going to spend the winter. I must not forget to tell you one thing,
however, which, I daresay, some of you who may have crossed "over the
sea," and _not_ found it very delightful, may be anxious to know about.
I mean about the voyage in the 'normous boat, which Baby had been so
looking forward to, poor little fellow.

Well, wasn't it lucky, he was not at all disappointed? They had the
loveliest day that ever was seen, and Baby thought 'normous boats far
the nicest way of travelling, and he couldn't understand why grandfather
couldn't make them go all the way to Santino in the nice boat, and when
they explained to him that it couldn't be, because there was no sea for
boats to go on all the way, he thought there must have been some great
mistake in the way the world was made. And when they got to Santino, and
the first thing he saw _was_ the sea, blue and beautiful like a fairy
dream, Baby was quite startled.

"Mother, auntie!" he said, reproachfully, "you toldened him there
weren't no sea."

"We didn't mean that, Baby, dear," said mother; "we meant that there was
no sea to come the shortest way; we would have had to come all round the
land, and it would have been much longer. Look, it is like this," and
mother traced with her parasol a sort of map on the sand, to show Baby
that they had come a much nearer way. For they were standing by the
sea-shore at the time.

"Yes," said Herr Baby, after looking on without speaking for a minute or
two, "him under'tands now."

"So you've had your first lesson in geography," said auntie.

Baby stared up at her.

"Are _that_ jography?" he said. "Him thought jography were awful, dedful
difficult. Denny is so _werry_ c'oss when her has jography to learn."

"Oh, because, of course, you know," said Denny, getting rather red,
"_my_ jography is _real_ jography, with books and maps and ever so long
rows of names to learn. Baby's so stupid--he always takes up things so;
he'll be thinking now that if he makes marks on the sand, he'll be
learning jography."

Denny turned away with a very superior air. Baby looked much hurt.

  [Illustration: "Are _that_ jography?" he said.--P. 94.]

"Him's not stupid, _are_ him?" he said; and in a moment Celia and Fritz
were hugging him and calling Denny a naughty, unkind girl to tease him.
Mother and auntie had walked on a little, so things _might_ have gone on
to a quarrel if Lisa hadn't stopped it.

"Mine children," she said, "it is too pity to be not friendly together.
See what one beautifullest place this is--sky so blue and sea so blue,
and all so bright and sunny. One should be nothing but happy here."

"Yes," said Celia, looking round, "it is an awfully pretty place."

Celia, you see, was just beginning to be old enough to notice really
beautiful things in a way that when children are _very_ little, they
cannot quite understand, though some do much more than others.

"It is a _very_ pretty place," she said again, as if she were speaking
to herself, for Fritz and Denny had taken it into their heads to run
races, of which Lisa was very glad, and Celia stood still by herself,
looking round at the lovely sea and sky, and the little white town
perched up above, with the mountains rising behind. Suddenly a little
hand was slipped into hers.

"Him would like to live here everways," said Baby's voice; "it _are_ so
pitty--somefin like Heaven, p'raps."

"I don't know," said Celia, "I suppose Heaven must be prettier than
anything we could fancy."

"There's gold streets in Heaven, Lisa says," said Baby; "him sinks blue
sky streets would be much pittier."

"So do I," said Celia.

Then they walked on a little, watching Fritz and Denny, already like two
black specks in front--they had run on so far--and, somehow, in the
_very_ bright sunshine, one seemed to see less clearly. Mother and
auntie were in front too, and when Fritz and Denny raced back again,
quite hot and out of breath, mother said it was time for them all to go
in; it was still rather too hot to be out much near the middle of the
day, though it was already some way on in November, and next month would
be the month that Christmas comes in!

"How funny it seems," said Celia. "Why, when we left home it was quite
winter. Just think how we were wrapped up when we started on the
journey, and now we're quite warm enough with nothing at all over our
frocks."

"It may be cold enough before long," said mother, who was more
accustomed to hot climates than the children; "sometimes the cold
hereabouts comes quite suddenly, and it even seems colder from having
been so warm before. I daresay you will be glad of your thick clothes
before Christmas. But we must get on a little quicker, or else
grandfather will be in a hurry for his breakfast."

"Ganfather's werry lazy not to have had him's breakfast yet," said
Baby. "_Him's_ had _him's_ breakfast ever so long ago, hundreds of years
ago."

"Oh, Baby," said Denny, "how you do 'saggerate! It _couldn't_ have been
hundreds of years ago, because, you know, you weren't born then."

"Stupid girl!" said Baby, "how does you know? you wasn't there."

"Well, _you_ weren't there," said Denny again.

"Children, don't contradict each other. It's not nice," said auntie.

"Him didn't begin," said Baby, "t'were Denny beginned."

"I didn't. I only said _once_ that Baby wasn't born hundreds of years
ago," said Denny, "and then he----"

"Onst is as wurst as twicet," said Baby.

Mother turned round at this. There was a funny look on her face, but
still she spoke rather gravely.

"Baby, I don't know what's coming over you," she said. "It isn't like
you to speak like that."

Baby's face grew red, and he turned his head away.

"Him didn't mean _zeally_ that ganfather were lazy," he said, in a low
voice.

"It wasn't _that_ I was vexed with you for," said mother. "I know you
were joking when you said that. I meant what you said to Denny."

"Him's werry sorry," said Baby, on the point of tears.

"Never mind. Don't cry about it," said mother, who really wanted the
children to be very good and happy this first day. And she was a little
afraid of Baby's beginning to cry, for, _sometimes_, once he had begun,
it was not very easy to stop him.

"You don't understand about grandfather and his breakfast," said auntie.
"Here nobody has big breakfast when they first get up except you
children, who have the same that you have at home."

"No we don't," said Denny. "At home we have bread and milk every day
except Sunday--on Sunday we have bacon or heggs, because that's the
nothing-for-breakfast day."

Auntie stared at Denny.

"Really, Denny," she said, "it is sometimes a little difficult to be
sure that you have got all your senses. How can you have 'nothing for
breakfast' when you have bacon, and--who in the world ever taught you to
say 'heggs'?"

"I meant to say 'neggs,'" said Denny very humbly. "Grandfather laughed
at me because I didn't say 'hippotamus' right--I called it a
'nippotamus,' and he made me say 'hi-hi-hip,' and that's got me into the
way of saying it to everything, like calling a negg, a hegg."

"A _negg_," repeated auntie slowly. "Can't you hear any difference
between 'a negg,' and 'an egg'? Spell, a-n an, e-g-g egg."

Denny repeated it.

"What dedful jography Denny's having," observed Baby; "I can say _a
negg, quite_ right."

"And so you too call 'a negg' nothing for breakfast?" said auntie.

"Neggs and bacon is nothing for breakfast," answered Baby.

"Auntie," said Fritz, "you don't understand. We call it nothing for
breakfast when there's not bread-and-milk, you know, for on
bread-and-milk days we have just one little cup of tea and a bit of
bread-and-butter after the bread-and-milk. But on Sundays, and
birthdays, there's nothing for the _first_, and so we get better things,
more like big people, and tea, and whatever there is, as soon as we
begin. That's why we like 'nothing for breakfast,' do you see, auntie?"

"I see," said auntie, "but I certainly couldn't have guessed. I hope
there's _something_ for breakfast to-day for us, for I'm very hungry,
and look, there's grandfather coming out to meet us, which looks as if
he were hungry too. And what have you to say to it, old man?" she added,
as Herr Baby came up the steps, one foot at a time, of course, "aren't
you hungry after your walk?"

"Him's hungry for him's _dinner_, but not for him's _breakfast_; in
course not," said Baby, with great dignity.




CHAPTER VI.

AN OLD SHOP AND AN OGRE

   "Innocent face with the sad sweet eyes,
    Smiling on us through the centuries."


Baby and Fritz went out a walk that afternoon in the town with auntie
and Lisa. Celia and Denny had gone for a drive with mother and
grandfather, which the big people thought would make a good division.
Grandfather was very fond of children, but in a carriage, he used to
say, _two_ small people were enough of a good thing. So Celia and Denny
worried Lisa to get out their best hats and jackets--which were not
unpacked, as grandfather had not yet decided whether they should stay at
the hotel or get a house for themselves--and set off in great spirits on
the back seat of the carriage.

Fritz and Baby were in very good spirits too. Fritz wanted to walk along
the sort of front street of the town which faced the sea, for he was
never tired of looking at boats and ships. Baby liked them too, but what
he most wanted to see was the shops. Baby was very fond of shops. He was
fond of buying things, but before he bought anything he used to like to
be quite sure which was the best shop to get it at--I mean to say at
which shop he could get it best--and he often asked the price two or
three times before he fixed. And he had never before seen so many shops
or such pretty and curious ones as there were at Santino, so he was
quite delighted, though if you hadn't known him well you would hardly
have guessed it, for he trotted along as grave as a little judge, only
staring about him with all his eyes.

And indeed there were plenty of things to stare at. Fritz's tongue went
very fast. He wanted auntie to stop every minute to look at something
wonderful. The carts drawn by oxen pleased him and Baby very much.

"That's the working cows they told us about," said Fritz. "They're very
nice, but I think I like horses best, don't you, Baby?"

"No, him likes cows best," said Baby, "when him's a man him will have a
calliage wif hundreds of cows to pull it along, and wif lots and lots of
gold bells all tinkling. Won't that be lubly?"

"Not half so nice as a lot of ponies, all with bells," said Fritz,
"they'd make ever so much more jingling, 'cos they go so fast. Isn't it
funny to see all the women with handkerchers on their heads and no
bonnets, Baby?"

"When him's a man," said Baby again--he was growing more talkative
now--"when him's a man, him's going to have auntie and Lisa," auntie and
Lisa came first, of course, because they happened to be in his sight,
"and mother, and Celia, and Denny _all_ for his wifes, and them shall
all wear most bootly hankerwifs on them's heads, red and blue and pink
and every colour, and gold--lots of gold."

"Thank you," said auntie, "but by that time my hair, for one, will be
quite gray; I shall be quite an old woman. I don't think such splendid
trappings would suit me."

"Him said _handkerwifs_, not traps--him doesn't know what traps is,"
said Baby. "And him will be werry kind to you when you're old. Him will
always let you come in and warm yourself, and give you halfpennies."

"Thank you, dear, I'm sure you will," said auntie. But she and Fritz
looked at each other. That was one of Herr Baby's ideas, and they
couldn't get him to understand, so mother settled it was better to
leave it and he'd understand of himself when he grew bigger. He thought
that _everybody_, however rich and well off they might be, had to grow
quite, quite poor, and to beg for pennies in the streets before they
died. Wasn't it a funny fancy? It was not till a good while afterwards
that mother found out that what had made him think so was the word
"old." He couldn't understand that growing old could mean only growing
old in years--he thought it meant as well, poor and worn-out, like his
own little old shoes. Just now it would have been no good trying to
explain, even if mother had quite understood what was in his mind, which
she didn't till he told her himself long after. For it only made him cry
when people tried to explain and _he_ couldn't explain what he meant.
There was nothing vexed him so much! And I think there was something
rather nice mixed up with this funny idea about getting old. It made
Baby wish to be so kind to all poor old people. He would look at any
poor old beggar in such a strange sad way, and he always _begged_ to be
allowed to give them a penny. And, though no one knew of it, in his own
mind he was thinking that his dear little mother or his kind auntie
would be like that some day, and he would like rich little boys to be
kind to them then, just as he was now to other poor old people. Of
course, he said to himself, "If _him_ sees dear little mother and auntie
when they get old, _him_ will take care of them and let them rest at his
house every time they come past, but _p'raps_ him might be far away
then."

And sometimes, when grandfather spoke about getting old and how white
his hair was growing, Baby would look at him very gravely, for in his
own mind he was wondering if the time was very soon coming for poor
grandfather to be an old beggar-man. Baby thought it _had_ to be, you
see, he thought it was just what must come to everybody.

Just as auntie and he had finished talking about getting old they turned
a corner and went down a street which led them away from the view of the
sea. This street had shops at both sides, and some of them were very
pretty, but they were not the kind of shops that the little boys cared
much for--they were mostly dressmakers' and milliners' and shawl shops.
Lots of grand dresses and hats and bonnets were to be seen, which would
have pleased Celia and Denny perhaps, but which Fritz said were very
stupid. Auntie did not seem to care for them either--she was in a hurry
to go to an office where she was going to ask about a house that might
do for them. So she walked on quickly, as quickly at least as Baby's
short legs could go, for she held him by the hand, and Fritz and Lisa
came behind. They left this street in a minute and crossed through two
or three others before auntie could find the one she wanted. Suddenly
Baby gave her a tug.

"Oh auntie," he said, "p'ease 'top one minute. Him sees shiny glass jugs
like dear little mother's. Oh, do 'top."

Auntie stopped. They were passing what is called an old curiosity shop;
it was a funny looking place, seeming very crowded even though it was a
large shop, for it was so very full of all sorts of queer things. Some
among them were more queer than pretty, but some were very pretty too,
and in one corner of the window there were several jugs, and cups, and
bottles, and such things, of very fine glass, with the same sort of
soft-coloured shine on it that Baby remembered in the two jugs that he
had pulled down in the tiny trunk. Baby's eyes had spied them out at
once.

  [Illustration: "Oh, auntie," he said, "p'ease 'top one minute.
  Him sees shiny glass jugs like dear little mother's. Oh, do
  'top."--P. 106.]

"Look, look, auntie," he said, again gently tugging her.

"Yes, Baby dear, very pretty," said auntie, but without paying much
attention to the glass, for she was not thinking of Baby's adventure in
the pantry at the moment, and did not know what jugs of his mother's he
meant.

"There is two _just_ like mother's," said Baby, but he spoke lower now,
almost as if he were speaking to himself. An idea had come into his mind
which he had hardly yet understood himself, and he did not want to speak
of it to any one else. He just stood at the window staring in, his two
eyes fixed on the glass jugs, and the great question he was saying to
himself was, "How many pennies would they cost?"

"Them's a little smaller, him sinks," he murmured, "but p'raps mother
wouldn't mind."

It was a mistake of his that they were smaller; they were really a
little larger than the broken ones. Besides Baby had never seen the
broken ones till they _were_ broken. One of them had been much less
smashed than the other, and mother had examined it to see if it could
possibly be mended so as to look pretty as an ornament, even though it
would never do to hold water, and, when she found nothing could be done,
she had told Thomas to keep the top part of it as a sort of pattern, in
case she ever had a chance of getting the same. I think I forgot to
explain this to you before, and you may have wondered how Baby knew so
well what the jugs had been like.

"Them is a little smaller," he said again to himself. He did not
understand that things often look smaller when they are among a great
many others of the same kind, and though there was not a very great deal
of the shiny glass in the shop window, there was enough to make it
rather a wonder that such a little boy as Baby had caught sight of the
two jugs at all, for they were behind the rest. He had time to look at
them well, for, though auntie had been rather in a hurry, she, too,
stood still in front of the shop, for something had caught her eyes too.

"How _very_ pretty, how sweet!" she said to herself, "I wish I could
copy it. It seems to me beautifully done," and when Fritz, who had not
found the shop so interesting as the others had done, in his turn gave
her a tug and said, "Auntie, aren't you coming?" she pointed out to him
what it was she was so pleased with.

"Isn't it sweet, Fritz?" said auntie.

"Yes," said Fritz, "but it's rather dirty, auntie, isn't it?"

Fritz was very, what is called, _practical_. The "it" that auntie was
speaking about was an old picture, hanging up on the wall at the side of
the door. It was the portrait of a little girl, a very little girl, of
not more than three or four years old. She had a dear little face, sweet
and bright, and yet somehow a very little sad, or else it was the
long-ago make of the dress, and the faded look of the picture itself,
beside the baby-like face that made it _seem_ sad. You couldn't help
thinking the moment you saw it, "Dear me, that little girl must be a
very old woman by now or most likely she must be dead!" I think it was
that that made one feel sad on first looking at the picture, for, after
all, the face _was_ bright and happy-looking: the rosy, roguish, little
mouth was smiling, the soft blue eyes had a sort of twinkling fun in
them, though they were so soft, and the fair hair, so fair that it
almost seemed white, drawn up rather tight in an old-fashioned way, fell
back again on one side as if little Blue-eyes had just been having a
good run. And one fat, dimpled shoulder was poked out of the prim white
frock in a way that, I daresay, had rather shocked the little girl's
mother when the painter first showed her his work, for our little, old,
great-great-grandfathers' and great-great-grandmothers', children, must
have had to sit very, very still in their very best and stiffest frocks
and suits when their pictures were painted, poor little things! They
were not so lucky as you are nowadays, who have only to go to the
photograph man's for half an hour, and keep your merry faces still for a
quarter of a minute, if your mothers want to have a picture of you!

But Blue-eyes must have had some fun when _her_ picture was painted, I
think, or else that little shoulder wouldn't have got leave to poke
itself out of its sleeve, and there wouldn't have been that mischievous
look about the comers of her mouth.

"_Isn't_ it a little dirty, auntie?" said Fritz.

"Wouldn't your face look a little dirty if it had been hanging up in a
frame for over a hundred years?" said auntie, laughing, at which Fritz
looked rather puzzled.

Then auntie's eyes went back to the picture again.

"It _is_ sweet," she said, "very, very sweet, and so perfectly natural."

All this time, as I told you, Herr Baby's whole mind had been given to
the shiny glasses. Suddenly the sound of his aunt's voice caught his
ear, and he looked up.

"What is it that is so 'weet, auntie?" he said.

"The picture over there, dear. Hanging up by the door. The little girl."

Baby looked up, and in a moment his eyes brightened.

"Oh, what a _dear_ little baby!" he said. "Oh, her _is_ 'weet! Auntie,
him would so like to kiss her."

"You darling!" said auntie, her glance turning from the sweet picture
face above to the sweet living face beside her. "I wonder if you will
ever learn to paint like that, Baby. _I_ should very much like to copy
it if I could have the loan of it. It would be sure to be very dear to
buy," she added to herself. "But we must hurry, my little boys," she
went on. "I was tempted to waste time admiring the picture, but we must
be quick."

Fritz and Lisa turned away with auntie, but Baby waited one moment
behind. He pressed his face close against the shop window and whispered
softly,

"Pitty little girl, him would like to kiss you. Him will come a 'nother
day. P'ease, pitty little girl, don't let nobody take away the shiny
glasses, for him wants to buy them for mother."

Then, quite satisfied, he trotted down the street after the others, who
were waiting for him a few doors off.

"Were you saying good-bye to the picture, Baby?" said auntie, smiling.

"Yes," said Baby gravely.

Auntie soon found the office where she was to hear about the house they
were thinking of taking. The little boys stood beside her and listened
gravely while she asked questions about it, though they couldn't
understand what was said.

"Him wishes the people in this countly wouldn't talk lubbish talk," said
Herr Baby to Fritz with a sigh. "Him would so like to know what them
says."

"_I_ want to know if we're going to have a house with a garden," said
Fritz. "That's all _I_ care about," and as soon as they were out in the
street again, he asked auntie if "the man" had said there was a garden
to the house.

"There are several houses that I have to tell your grandfather about,"
said auntie. "Some have gardens and some haven't, but the one we like
the best has a garden, though not a very big one."

"Not as big as the one at home?" said Fritz.

"Oh dear no, of course not," said auntie. "It is quite different here
from at home. People only come to stay a short time, they wouldn't care
to be troubled with big gardens."

"I don't mind," said Fritz amiably, "if only it's big enough for us to
have a corner to dig in, and somewhere to play in when Lisa's in a fussy
humour."

"Mine child," said Lisa mildly. Poor Lisa, she was not a very fussy
person! Indeed she was rather too easy for such lively young people as
Fritz and Denny.

"And do you want a garden, too, very much, Baby?" said auntie.

Baby had hardly heard what they were saying. His mind was still running
on the shiny jugs and the blue-eyed little girl.

"Him wants gate lots of pennies," he said, which didn't seem much of an
answer to auntie's question.

"Lots of pennies, my little man," said auntie. "What do you want lots of
pennies for?"

But Baby would not tell.

Just then they saw coming towards them in the street two very funny
looking men. They had no hats or caps on their heads, so the children
could see that they had no hair either, at least none on the top, where
it was shaved quite off, and only a sort of fringe all round left. Then
they had queer loose brown coats, with big capes, something like
grandfather's Inverness cloak, Fritz thought, and silver chains hanging
down at their sides, and, queerest of all, no stockings or proper boots
or shoes, only things like the _soles_ of shoes strapped on to their
bare feet. These were called sandals, auntie said, and she told the boys
that these funny looking men were monks, "Franciscans," she said they
were called. They all lived together, and they never kept any money, and
people said--but auntie thought that was not quite true--that they never
washed themselves.

"Nasty dirty men," said Fritz, making a face. "I shouldn't like to be a
Franciscan."

"Not in winter, Fritz?" said Baby. "Him wouldn't mind in winter when the
water _are_ so cold. Lisa," he went on, turning round to his nurse,
"'member--when the _werry_ cold mornings comes, him's going to be a
Frantisker--will you 'member, Lisa?"

"But what about the pennies?" said auntie, laughing. "If you are a
Frantisker, Baby, you won't have any pennies, and you said just now you
wanted a great lot of pennies."

Baby looked very grave.

"Then him won't be a Frantisker," he said decidedly.

After that he spoke very little all the way home. He had a great deal on
his mind, you see. And his last thought that night as he was falling
asleep was, "Him are so glad him asked the little pitty girl to take
care of the shiny jugs."

Funny little Herr Baby! How much was fancy, how much was earnest in his
busy baby mind, who can tell?

A few days after this, they all moved from the Hotel to the pretty house
with a garden which auntie had gone to ask about. It _was_ a pretty
house. I wish I could show it to you, children! It had not only a garden
but a terrace, and this terrace overlooked the sea, the blue sunny sea
of the south. And from one side, or from a little farther down in the
garden, one could see the white-capped mountains, rising, rising up into
the sky, with sometimes a soft mist about their heads which made them
seem even higher than they were, "high enough to peep into heaven," said
Baby; and sometimes, on very clear days, standing out sharply against
the blue behind, so that one could hardly believe it would take more
than a few minutes to run to the top and down again.

There were many interesting things in this garden--things that the
children had not had in the old garden at home, nice though it was. It
was not so beautifully neat as the flower part of the garden at home,
but I do not think the children liked it any the less for that. The
trees and bushes grew so thickly that down at the lower end it was
really like a wilderness, a most lovely place for hide-and-seek. Then
there was a fountain, a real fountain, where the water actually danced
and fell all day long; and all round the windows of the house and the
trellised balcony there were the most lovely red shaded leaves, such as
one never sees in such quantities in the north. And in among the stones
of the terrace there lived lizards--the most delightful lizards. One in
particular grew so friendly that he used to come out at meal-times to
drink a little milk which the children spilt for him on purpose; for the
day nursery, or school-room, as Celia liked it to be called, opened on
to the terrace too, though at the other end from the two drawing-rooms
and grandfather's "study," and the windows were long and low, opening
like doors, so that Lisa had hard work to keep the children quiet at
table the first few days, for every minute they were jumping up to see
some new wonder that they caught sight of. Altogether it was a very
pretty home to spend the winter in, and every one seemed very happy.
Bully and the "calanies" were as merry as larks, if it is true that
larks are merrier than other birds, and Peepy-Snoozle and Tim,
mistaking the bright warm sunshine for another summer, I suppose, got in
the habit of being quite lively about the middle of the day as well as
in the middle of the night, instead of spending all the daylight hours
curled up like two very sleepy fairy babies with brown fur coats on, in
their nice white cotton-wool nests.

There was so much to do and to think of the first few days that I think
Baby forgot a little about what he had seen in the old curiosity shop.
Auntie, too, was too busy to give any thought to the picture which had
so taken her fancy, though neither she nor Baby _really_ forgot the dear
little face with its loving, half-merry, half-sad blue eyes. But auntie
had to help mother to get everything settled; and of course there was a
good deal to explain to the strange servants, for neither Peters nor
Linley the maid knew "lubbish talk," as Baby _would_ call it, at all,
and it was very funny indeed to hear Peters trying to make the cook
understand how grandfather liked his cutlets, or Linley "pounding" at
the housemaid, as Fritz called it, to get it into her head that _she_
didn't call it _cleaning_ a room to sweep all the dirt into a corner
where it couldn't be seen! Peters was more patient than Linley. When
Linley couldn't make herself understood she used to shout louder and
louder, as if that would make the others know what she meant, and then
she used to say to Celia that it really was "a _very_ hodd thing that
the people of this country seemed not to have all their senses." And
however Celia explained to her, she _couldn't_ be got to see that she
must seem just as stupid to them as they seemed to her! Peters was less
put about. He had been in India with grandfather, so he said he was used
to "furriners." He seemed to think everybody that wasn't English could
be put together as "furriners"; but he had brought a dictionary and a
book of little sentences in four languages, and he would sit on the
kitchen table patiently trying one language after another on the poor
cook, just as when one can't open a lock, one tries all the keys one can
find, to see if by chance one will fit. The cook was a very mild, gentle
man; he had a nice wife and two little children in the town, and he was
inclined to be very fond of Herr Baby, and to pet him if ever he got a
chance. But that wasn't for a good while, for Baby was at first terribly
frightened of him. He had a black moustache and whiskers and very black
eyes, and they looked blacker under his square white cook's cap, and the
first time Baby saw him through the kitchen window, the cook happened
to be standing with a large carving-knife in one hand, and a chicken
which he was holding up by the legs, in the other. Off flew Herr Baby. A
little way down the garden he ran against Denny, who was also busy
examining their new quarters.

"Oh, Denny, Denny!" he cried, "this is a dedful place--there's a' ogre,
a real tellable ogre in the house. Him's seen him in one of the windows
under the dimey-room. Oh, Denny, Denny, p'raps him'll eaten us up."

Denny for the first moment was, to tell the truth, a little bit
frightened herself. Common sense told her there _were_ no such things as
ogres, not now-a-days any way, at least not in England, their own
country. But a dreadful idea struck her that this was _not_ England;
this might be one of the countries where ogres, like wolves and bears,
were still occasionally to be found. There was no telling, certainly;
but not for a good deal would Miss Denise Aylmer, a young lady of nine
years old _past_, have owned to being frightened as long as she could
possibly help it.

She caught Baby by the hand.

"What sall we do?" he said; "sall we go and tell mother?"

Denny considered.

"We'd better go and see again," she said very bravely. "You must have
made a mistake, I think, Baby dear. I don't _think_ there can be any
ogres here."

Baby was much struck by Denny's courage. His hand slipped back a very
little out of hers.

"Will _you_ go and see, Denny?" he said. "Him will stay here till you
comes back."

"Oh, no, you'd better come with me," said Denny, who felt that even Baby
was better than nobody. "I shouldn't know where you saw the ogre," and
she kept tight hold of his hand. "Which window was it?"

"It were at a tiny window _really_ under the ground. Him was peeping to
see if there was f'owers 'side of the wall," said Baby. "Him'll show
you, Denny; him _are_ so glad you isn't f'ightened."

They set off down the path, making their way rather cautiously as they
got near the house. Suddenly Denny felt Baby squeeze her hand more
tightly, and with a sort of scream he turned round and hid his face
against her.

"There! There!" he cried. "Him sees the ogre coming."

  [Illustration: Baby ventured to peep round. The little black-eyed,
  white-capped man came towards them smiling.--P. 121.]

Denny looked up. She saw a rather little man with a white apron and a
white cap, carrying a couple of cackling hens or chickens in his arms,
coming across the garden from the house. He was on his way to a little
sort of poultry-yard, where he had fastened up half-a-dozen live
chickens he had bought at the market that morning, meaning to kill two
of them for dinner, but finding them not so fat as he had expected, he
was putting them back among their friends for a day or two. Very like a
_real_ ogre, if Denny and Baby had understood all about it, which they
didn't. Denny herself, for a minute or two, felt puzzled as to who this
odd-looking man could be. But he was no _ogre_, that was certain, any
way.

"Don't be frightened, Baby, it's not a' ogre," she said. "Look up, he's
far too little."

Baby ventured to peep round. The little black-eyed, white-capped man
came towards them smiling.

"Bon jour, Mademoiselle, bon jour, Monsieur Bb," he said, looking
quite pleased. And then he stroked down the ruffled feathers of the poor
chickens, and held them out to the two children, chattering away at a
great rate in Baby's "lubbish talk," hardly a word of which they
understood.

"Can he be wanting to sell the chickens?" said Denny.

The cook, who had before this lived with families from England,
understood the children's language better than they did his, which,
however, is not saying a great deal.

"Yes, Mees, pairfectly," he said. "Me sell zem at ze march the morning.
Fine poulets, goot poulets, not yet strong--wait one, two, 'ree days--be
strong for one grand dinner for Madame."

"Who are you? What's your name, please?" said Denny, still a little
alarmed.

"Jean-Georges, Mademoiselle," said the little man, with a bow.
"Jean-Georges compose charming plates for Mademoiselle and Monsieur
Bb. Jean-Georges loves little messieurs and little 'demoiselles.
Madame permit Monsieur and Mademoiselle visit Jean-Georges in his
cuisine one day."

Denny caught the word "cuisine," which, of course, children, you will
know means "kitchen."

"He's the cook, Baby," she said, with great relief; "don't you remember
grandfather said he must have a man cook? Good morning, Mr. Cook, we'll
ask mother to let us go and see you one day in your kitchen, and you
must make us very nice things to eat, please Mr. Cook."

"Pairfectly, Mademoiselle," said Jean-Georges, with as magnificent a
bow as he could manage, considering the two chickens in his arms, and
then he walked away.

"What a _very_ nice man!" said Denny, feeling very proud of herself, and
quite forgetting that she, too, had not been without some fears. "You
see, Baby dear, how foolish it is to be frightened. I _told_ you there
couldn't be any ogres here."

Herr Baby did not answer for a moment. He had certainly very much
admired Denny's courage, but still he wasn't quite sure that she had not
been a _very_ little afraid, just for a minute, when he had called out
"There he is!"

"What would you have done if there _had_ been a' ogre, Denny?" he said.

"Oh, bother," said Denny, "what's the good of talking about things that
_couldn't_ be? Talk of something sensible, Baby."

Baby grew silent again. They walked on slowly down the garden path.

"Denny," said Baby, in a minute or two, "didn't the little man say
somefin about mother having a party?"

Denny pricked up her ears at this. Parties of all kinds pleased her very
much.

"Did he?" she said, "I didn't notice. He said something about Madame's
dinner, but I didn't think he meant a dinner-_party_. Perhaps he did
though. We'll ask. I'd like mother to have some parties; it seems quite
a long time since I had one of my best frocks on to come down to the
drawing-room before dinner, the way we did at home. And I know mother
and auntie have friends here. I heard that stupid little footman asking
Linley what day 'Miladi' would 'receive,' that means have visitors,
Baby."

Denny's tongue had run on so fast, that it had left Baby's wits some way
behind. They had stopped short at the first idea of a party.

"Mother likes to make _werry_ pitty dinners when she has parties," he
said. "Mother told him that were why she were so solly when him breaked
her's pitty glasses."

"I don't know what you're talking about, Baby," said Denny. "Let's have
a race. I'll give you a start."




CHAPTER VII.

BABY'S SECRET

  "'Pussy, only you I'll tell,
    For you can keep secrets well;
    Promise, pussy, not a word.'
    Pussy reared her tail and purred."


There was a cat at the Villa Dsire, Baby's, and Denny's, and "all of
them's house," as Baby would have called it. Where the cat came from I
don't know--whether it belonged to the villa and let itself out with it
every winter, like the furniture, or whether it was really the cat of
Madame Jean-Georges, and had followed Monsieur Jean-Georges back one
evening when he had been home to see his "good friend" (that was what he
called his wife), and his two "bbs," is what I cannot tell. I only
know the cat was there, and that when Baby could get a chance of playing
with it he was very pleased. He didn't often have a chance, in his own
room, for "Mademoiselle," as Celia was always called by the new
servants, a title which she thought much nicer than "Miss Aylmer," or
"Miss Celia," _Mademoiselle_, said "the stupid little footman," had
given strict orders that "Minet" was not to be allowed upstairs for fear
of the "pets," the "calanies," and the Bully, and Peepy-Snoozle, and
Tim, all of whom would have been very much to Minet's taste, I fear. It
was very funny to see the way the little footman went "shoo-ing" at the
poor cat the moment Celia appeared, for Celia had rather grand manners
for her age, and the servants thought her very "distinguished,"
especially the stupid little footman. But Herr Baby was very sorry for
poor Minet; he had no particular pet of his own here, nothing to make up
for his "labbits," and so he took a great fancy to the pussy.

"Poor little 'weet darling," he would call it; "Celia's a c'uel girl to
d'ive Minet away, _Minet_ wouldn't hurt the calanies, or the Bully, or
the sleepy-mouses; Minet is far too good."

"Pray, how do _you_ know, Baby?" Celia would say. "Cats are cats all the
world over, every one knows that."

"_Minet_ aren't," Baby would have it, "Minet has suts a kind heart. Him
asked Minet if her would hurt the calanies and the sleepy-mouses, and
her said 'no, sairtingly not.'"

"Baby!" said Denny, "what stories! Cats can't talk. You shouldn't tell
stories."

"Minet can talk," said Baby. "When him asks for somefin, her says
'proo-proo-oo,' and that means 'yes,' and if her means 'no,' her humps
up her back and s'akes her tail. When him asked Minet if her would like
to hurt the calanies, her humped up her back _never_ so high, and sook
and _sook_ her tail, for no, _no_, NO!"

Celia could not find an answer to this. Baby went on stroking Minet with
great satisfaction, as if there was nothing more to be said.

"All the same," said Celia at last, "I don't want Minet to come
upstairs. She's quite as happy downstairs, and, you see, it would
_frighten_ the birds and the dormice if they saw her, for _they_
mightn't understand that she wouldn't, on any account, hurt them."

"Werry well," said Baby, and he went on playing with his new pet.

"Herr Baby," said Lisa coming into the room a moment or two later; "mine
child, how is it that your coat is so dirty? All green, Herr Baby, as if
you had rubbed it on the wet grass."

"It's with his poking in among the bushes by the kitchen window," said
Denny of the ready tongue; "yesterday, you know, Baby, when you
thought----"

"Hush," said Baby, "don't talk to me. You distairb me and the cat--we'se
busy."

Denny and Lisa looked at each other and smiled.

"Pussy, pitty pussy, dear Minet," went on Baby, who wanted to stop
Denny's account of his fears.

"We're going out, Herr Baby," said Lisa. "There are commissions for your
lady mamma. We are to go to the patissier and----"

"Who are the pattyser?" said Baby.

"The cumfectioner," said Denny.

Baby pricked up his ears.

"We are to go to the patissier," said Lisa, "to order some cakes for
Miladi for to-morrow, when Miladi's friends come to dine; and perhaps we
will buy some little cake for Herr Baby's tea. Come, mine child, leave
Minet, and come."

Herr Baby got up from the corner of the room where he had been embracing
the cat; there was a grave look on his face, but he did not say anything
till he was out on the road with Lisa. Denny was not with them; she had
got leave to go a walk with Celia and the lady who came every day to
give her French lessons, which Denny thought much more grand than going
out with Baby and Lisa.

"Lisa," said Baby, after a few minutes, "are mother going to have a
party?"

"Not one very big party," said Lisa, "just some Miladis and some
Herren--some genkelmen--to dine."

"Will it look very pitty?" asked Baby.

"Not so pretty as at _home_," said Lisa, who, now that she was away from
it, of course looked upon The Manor--that was the name of "home"--as the
most lovely place in the world; "there's no nice glass, no nice pretty
dishes here. And Franois, he is so dumm--how you say 'dumm,' Herr
Baby?"

"Dumm," repeated Baby, exactly copying Lisa's voice, staring up in her
face.

"No, mine child, how you say it of English? Ah--I knows--_stupid_.
Franois, he is too stupid. Peters and I, we will make the table so
pretty as might be. Lisa will command some bon-bons."

"Mother will want the shiny jugs," thought poor Baby. "Him _s'ould_ have
brought him's pennies. Him would like to know if him has 'nuff pennies;
perhaps him could go to the little girl's shop when Lisa is at the
pattyser's."

But he said nothing aloud. How it was that he kept his thoughts to
himself, why he had such a dislike to any one knowing what was in his
mind, I cannot exactly tell; but so it was, and so it often is with very
little children, even though quite frank and open by nature. Baby had, I
think, a fear that mother might not like him to spend all his pennies on
the shiny jugs, perhaps she might say she would pay them herself, and
that would not have pleased him at all. Deep down in his honest little
heart was the feeling that _he_ had broken the glasses and _he_ should
pay for the new ones. But he said nothing to Lisa--he had never spoken
of the jugs to her--mother had been "so kind," never to tell any one
about what a silly little boy he had been, for mother knew that he
didn't like being laughed at. _Perhaps_ "they" would laugh at him now if
he told about wanting to buy the shiny jugs--he wouldn't mind so much if
he _had_ bought them, but "'appose they wouldn't let him go to the shop
to get them?" Poor little mother! She wouldn't have her pitty glasses
then for the party--no, it was much best to settle it all his own self.
Whom he meant by "they" I don't think Baby quite knew, he had a sort of
picture in his mind of grandfather and auntie and mother all talking
together, and Celia and Fritz and Denny all joining in, and saying that
"Baby was far too little to go to shops to buy things." And by the time
he had thought this all over, Herr Baby glancing up--for till now he had
been walking along with Lisa's hand, seeing and noticing nothing--found
that they were already in the street of the town where the biggest shops
were, and that Lisa was looking about to find the shop where she was to
give the orders for his mother.

It was a very pretty shop indeed--Baby had never seen such a pretty
shop. The cakes and bon-bons were laid out so nicely on the tables round
the wall, and they were all of such pretty colours. Baby walked round
and round admiring, and, I think, considering he was such a very little
boy, that it was very good of him not to think of touching any of the
tempting dainties. In a few minutes Lisa had ordered all she
wanted--then she chose some nice biscuits and a very few little
chocolate bon-bons, which she had put up in two paper parcels, and when
they came out of the shop she told Herr Baby that they were for him, his
mother had told her to get him something nice. Baby looked pleased, but
still he seemed very grave, and Lisa began wondering what he was
thinking of.

"Are you tired, mine child?" she said.

No, Herr Baby was not at all tired. He wanted to walk down the street to
the other end to see all the shops, he wanted to see _all_ the streets
and _all_ the shops before they went home. Lisa was rather amused. She
had not known Herr Baby was so _very_ fond of shops, she said, and it
would take far too long to see them _all_. But she went to the end of
that street with him, and then back again down the opposite side, and
then he begged her to turn down the other street they had crossed on
their way to the confectioner's, and they had gone quite to the end of
_it_, Baby staring in at all the shop windows in a way that really made
Lisa smile, for he looked so grave and solemn, when all of a sudden,
just as Lisa was thinking of saying they must go home, Baby gave a sort
of little scream and almost jumped across the street.

"Him sees it, him sees it," he cried, and when Lisa asked him what he
meant, all he would say was,

"That's the little street we went down with auntie the 'nother day," and
Lisa, who had forgotten all about the old shop window with the shiny
glass and the blue-eyed picture, wondered why he was so eager about it.

"Is that the way we came?" she said, "I am not sure. I not quite
remember."

But "him wants to go home that way," persisted Baby, and he tugged Lisa
along. They passed at the other side, but Baby did not mind that. He
could see across quite plainly, for the street was narrow, and there
were still the glasses in the corner and the sweet baby-girl face up on
the wall, looking down on them.

And after that he was quite satisfied to go quietly home; he did not
speak much on the way, but Lisa was accustomed to his grave fits, and
did not pay much attention to them. He only asked her one question--just
as they were getting close to the Villa.

"Is it to-morrow mother's going to have all the pitty things for
dinner?" he said.

"Yes, Herr Baby, and Lisa will be busy, to show Franois how Miladi
likes everything. Herr Baby and Frulein Denny will be goot and play
peacefully in the garden to-morrow, so she can be busy," said Lisa, who
was very proud of being of so much consequence.

"Yes," said Herr Baby, "him won't want you to take care of him."

After tea he got out his money-box. This he often did. He was such a
careful little boy that mother let him keep his money himself, and it
was a great pleasure to him to count over the different kinds of
"pennies;" he called them all "pennies," brown, white, and even yellow
pennies, for Baby had a pound and a ten shilling piece that had been
given him on his last birthday, and that he had never been able to make
up his mind how to spend. He looked at them now with great satisfaction.

"See, Denny," he said, "him has two yellow pennies, a big and a little,
and free white pennies, a big and a little and a littler, and five brown
pennies. Him knows there's five, for him can count up to five, 'cos
five's just as old as him is going to be. See, Denny, isn't there a lot?
And the yellow pennies could be turned into lots and lots of white
pennies Lisa says, and the white pennies could be turned into lots of
brown pennies, isn't it funny? Isn't him werry rich, Denny?"

"Yes, I suppose so," said Denny, "I really don't know. I wish you
wouldn't chatter so, Baby. I can't learn my lessons."

Poor Baby! It was not often he was to blame for "chattering so." But he
looked with great respect at Denny for having lessons to do, and was
not at all offended. Denny was proud of being with Celia and the new
governess, but I think her pleasure was a little spoilt by finding that
the new governess had no idea of taking care of a little girl who didn't
do any lessons, and this evening she was rather cross at a row of French
words which she had to learn to say the next morning. Baby went quietly
off into the corner with his money-box, but finding it rather dull to
have no one to show his pennies to, he went out of the room, which you
remember was downstairs, and, opening a door which led to the kitchen,
peeped about in hopes of seeing his friend Minet. He had not long to
wait--Minet had a corner of her own by the kitchen wall, on the other
side of which was the stove, and where she found herself almost as warm
as in the kitchen, when Monsieur Jean-Georges objected to her company.
She was curled up in this corner when she heard Baby's soft voice
calling her--"Minet, Minet, pussy, pussy," and up she got, slowly and
lazily, as cats do when they are half asleep, but still willingly
enough, for she dearly loved Herr Baby.

"Minet," said Baby, when she appeared, and coming up to him rubbed her
furry coat against his little bare legs, "Minet, dear, come and sit wif
him on the 'teps going down to the garden, and him'll tell you about
his money."

But Lisa, coming by just then, said it was too cold now to sit on stone
steps; for warm as it was in the day at Santino the evenings got quickly
chilly.

"Us can't go back to the 'coolroom," said Baby; "Denny won't let dear
Minet come there, and him must stay wif Minet, 'cos her waked up when
him called her."

"Miss Denny must let you stay in the school-room," said Lisa. "There is
no little birds there for Minet to touch."

She opened the door, and Denny was too busy with her lessons to scold.

"You will be very quiet, Herr Baby," said Lisa. So Baby and Minet went
off into a corner with the money-box.

"Minet, dear," said Baby, in a low voice, "see what lots of pennies him
has. Yellow pennies, and white pennies, and brown pennies."

Minet purred, naturally, for Baby was stroking her softly with one hand
all the time he was holding up his pennies with the other.

"Dear Minet," said Baby, much gratified, "you is pleased that him has so
many pennies. Now, Minet, him will tell you a secret, a _gate, gate_
secret, about what him's going to do wif all him's pennies."

Here Minet purred again. Baby looked round. There was no one listening.
Lisa was going backwards and forwards, putting away the tea-things;
Denny was still groaning and grumbling over her row of words; Baby might
safely tell Minet his secret. Still he lowered his voice _so_ low that
certainly no one but Minet could hear. And when he left off speaking,
Minet purred more than ever. Only Baby thought it just as well to say to
her, before Lisa took him away up to bed, "Minet, dear, you'll be _sure_
not to tell nobody;" and I suppose Minet promised, for Baby seemed quite
pleased.

He woke in the morning with his head quite full of his great idea. They
were not to go a regular walk that day, Lisa told him, for in the
afternoon she would be busy, and Herr Baby would be good and play
quietly in the garden, would he not?

"All alone?" asked Baby.

"Perhaps Miss Denny will stay, too, if Herr Baby wishes," said Lisa;
"she was going again with Miss Celia, but----"

"Oh no," said Baby, "him would rather be alone, kite alone, 'cept Minet.
Fritz is very good to him, but Fritz will be at school. Fritz is never
at home now 'cept Thursdays."

"No," said Lisa; "but Herr Fritz is very happy at school, and when Herr
Baby is big he will go too."

"Yes," said Baby; but he didn't seem to think much what he was saying.
Lisa thought he was dull about Fritz being at school--I forgot to tell
you that Fritz went every day now to a very nice school in the town,
where there were a few boys about his own age--but Lisa was mistaken.

That afternoon, any one passing the low hedge which at one side was all
that divided the Villa garden from the road, would have seen a pretty
little picture. There was Baby, seated on the grass, one arm fondly
clasping Minet's neck, while with the other he firmly held the famous
money-box. He was dressed in his garden blouse only, but for some reason
he had his best hat on. And he kept looking about him, first towards the
house and then towards the garden gate, in a funny considering sort of
way.

At last he seemed to have made up his mind.

"Minet," he said to the cat, "him thinks we'll go now. 'Amember, Minet,
you've _p'omised_ to go wif him. If you get werry tired, Minet, him'll
try to carry you. If you could carry the money-box, and him could carry
you, then it would be _kite_ easy. What a pity you haven't got two more
paws, that would do for hands, Minet!"

Minet purred.

"Yes, poor Minet. Nebber mind, dear; but we must be going." And closely
followed by the cat, who had no idea, poor thing, of what was before
her, Baby made his way down the path to the garden gate. It was open, at
least not latched. Baby easily pushed it wide enough for his little self
to go through, and stood, with Minet and the money-box, triumphant on
the highroad.

"It were the best way, thit way," he said to himself. For there was
another gate to the Villa, leading out to the upper road. But this gate
was guarded by a lodge, and the "concierge," as they called the
lodge-keeper, came out to open it for every one who went in and out. And
"p'raps," thought Baby, "the concierge mightn't have let him through,
'cos, of course, her didn't know why him was going out alone with
Minet."

So Minet and he and the money-box found themselves out on the road on
their own account.

All the family was scattered that afternoon. Celia and Denny had gone a
long walk with their governess, Fritz was at school, mother and auntie
had driven to see some friends a good way off, meaning to call for Fritz
at his school on their way home. The servants, too, were all more busy
than usual on account of the ladies and gentlemen coming to dinner. Lisa
and Linley and Peters were all trying to make the strange servants
understand just how they were used to have the table at home, and giving
themselves a great deal more trouble than grandfather or mother would
have wished had they known about it. Lisa was very clever at arranging
flowers prettily, and she was so sure of Baby's quiet ways when he was
left to himself, that she never gave a thought to him once she saw him
safely settled in the garden with Minet. It was such a safe garden.
There really was no part of it where a child could get into any trouble,
for though there was a little water in the basin from which rose the
fountain, it was so little, that not even Minet could have wetted much
more than her paws in it. So Lisa went on quite comfortably doing the
flowers and arranging the dessert in the pantry, by way of giving
Franois a lesson, and now and then she would glance out of the window
which looked on to the garden, and, seeing Baby there with Minet, she
felt quite easy. She did once say to herself,

"I wonder why Herr Baby begged so to have his best hat to-day--but he is
one good child, one should please him sometimes."

I am afraid the truth was that Lisa spoilt her dear Baby a little!

After a while she looked out again. She did not see Herr Baby this time,
but she did not think anything of it.

"They will have gone to play among the bushes," she said to herself,
meaning by "they" Baby and Minet of course, and she went on with what
she was doing, and got so interested in helping Peters to explain to
Franois that in England people always changed the wine glasses at the
end of dinner, and put clean ones for dessert, that the time went on
without it ever entering her head to say to herself, "What can have
become of Herr Baby?"

Mother and auntie were later than they had expected of returning from
their drive. They had gone a long way, and coming back it was mostly
up-hill.

"Fritz will be thinking we have forgotten him," said mother, looking at
her watch, "but I told him to be sure to wait till we came. He is too
little to go home alone yet, at least till he knows his way quite well
or can speak enough to ask."

"We might have told Celia and Denny to call for him, as they are out
with Mademoiselle," said auntie.

Just then in turning a corner, for they were quite in the town now,
auntie's eyes caught sight of the narrow street where the old curiosity
shop was.

"By the by," she said, "I should so like to ask about that picture. I
told you about it, you remember, May?"--May, you know, was the
children's mother's name--"have we time to go that way?"

"I'm afraid not; we are late already," said mother. "I'm so sorry."

"Oh, never mind, another day will do quite well," said auntie,
cheerfully.

So they drove home, quickly, just stopping a moment to pick up Fritz,
who was waiting for them at the gate of his school.

If they _had_ happened to go round by the old curiosity shop, how
surprised they would have been; but what a great deal of trouble it
would have saved them, as you shall hear.

Lisa met them as they got home, with a long story about the table and
the flowers and the stupidness of Franois, which mother and auntie
could hardly help laughing at.

"Never mind, Lisa," said mother; "it will do very well, I am sure. Where
are the children?"

"Upstairs, Miladi, taking off their things. They have just come in,"
said Lisa, never thinking, somehow, as mother said the "children," but
that she was talking of Celia and Denny. For, somehow, in this
family--in every family there are little habits of the kind--Baby was
not often spoken of among "the children." They had all got so used to
the name of Herr Baby, which Lisa had called him by since he was quite a
wee baby, that he was seldom spoken of by any other, and often Baby
himself would talk gravely about "the children," without any one seeming
to think it odd.

"Upstairs, are they?" said mother. "Well, run off, Fritz, dear, and try
and get some of your lessons done before tea. Mademoiselle will help you
a little, I daresay, before she goes."

Off ran Fritz. He was a very good boy about his lessons, and anxious to
get on well. More to please Lisa and the others than that they cared,
mother and auntie went into the dining-room. They were standing looking
at the pretty flowers and leaves, when suddenly Fritz put his head in at
the door again.

"Lisa," he said, "where's Baby? He's not upstairs, and he's not in the
garden. Linley said you told him to play there this afternoon, but he's
_not_ there."

Lisa started, and her face grew white.

"Mine child!" she cried. "Ah, but he must be in the garden, Master
Fritz! I saw him there so happy, with the cat, just--ah, how long ago
was it? Have I forgotten him for so long? He must be hiding--to play,
to--how do you say?" for Lisa's English was very apt to fly away when
she got frightened or upset. "Ach, where can he be?" and off darted poor
Lisa.

Mother and auntie and Fritz looked at each other.

"Can he be _lost_?" said Fritz, with a very frightened face.

"Oh no, no," said auntie. "Lisa is so easily startled. But still----"

"Let us all go and look for him at once," said mother. "What a good
thing poor grandfather isn't back yet!"




CHAPTER VIII.

FOUND

         ----"he was not there:
     We searched the house, the grounds--in vain;
   We searched the green in our despair,
     And then we searched the house again."


It _was_ a good thing grandfather was out, for--and this was what mother
was thinking of--poor grandfather, though he looked such a fine, tall,
gray-haired old gentleman, was not really very strong or well. It was a
great deal for him that they had all come abroad this winter, and the
doctors had told mother and auntie that anything to startle or distress
him might make him very ill indeed. Poor grandfather! I can't tell you
what a kind, good man he was. He had stayed a great many years in India,
though he would have liked dreadfully to come home, because it was "his
duty" he said, and this had made him seem older than he really was, for
a hot country is very wearing out to people who are not born to it.
And, though he was so fond of his grandchildren, I think if he _had_ a
pet among them, it was little Herr Baby. The mere idea of his tiny
Raymond--Baby was named Raymond after grandfather--being lost, even for
an hour or two, would have troubled him dreadfully, and thinking of
this, auntie, too, repeated after mother,

"Yes, indeed, what a good thing grandfather isn't in. We _mustn't_ let
him know, May, till Baby's found."

They didn't stay to say anything more. Off they all set into the garden,
for, though Fritz said he had looked all over, they couldn't feel sure
that they might not find Baby in some corner, hiding, perhaps, for fun,
even. But when they had all been round and round the garden in every
direction--mother, and auntie, and Celia, and Denny, and Fritz, and
Mademoiselle Lucie, and Lisa, and Linley, and Peters, and Franois, and,
even at the end I believe, Monsieur Jean-Georges himself, and the rest
of the French servants--when they had all looked, and peeped, and
shouted, and whistled, and begged, and prayed Baby to come out if he was
hiding, and there was no answer, then they gave it up. It was impossible
that the little man could be in the garden.

Where could he be?

Fortunately there was nowhere in the garden where he could have hurt
himself--no pit or pond into which he could have fallen. And it was
surely impossible that any one could have come into the garden and
stolen him away, as Celia, with a pale face, whispered to auntie. Where
could he be, and what should they do?

Time was passing--the friends who were coming to dinner would be at the
villa before long; grandfather was _sure_ to appear in a few minutes.
What could they do?

"We must not tell grandfather, that is certain," said auntie. "May,
dear, it is very hard on you, I know, but I'll tell you how it must be.
You must stay here quietly and be ready for the friends who are coming,
and I will go off at once and do all, everything I can think of.
Mademoiselle Lucie, you know the town, and you can tell me all about the
police, and where to go to _in case_ we don't find our darling at once,
though I quite think we shall. I can't take you, Peters," for Peters was
eagerly coming forward, "Sir Raymond would miss you, nor you, Lisa, for
you must take care of the other children," at which Lisa all but broke
out crying; "It was too good of Mademoiselle Hlne to trust her; she
didn't deserve it." "And Franois would be no good. You and I,
Mademoiselle Lucie, will go at once. And you must tell grandfather that
I was obliged to go out, for an hour or two, unexpectedly."

"I am afraid he will think it very strange," said mother, "but I will do
my best."

Mother spoke quietly, but her face was very white.

"Do go, Nelly," she said, "as quick as you can."

And Celia and Denny, who had been thinking of bursting into tears, took
example by her and auntie, and tried to look cheerful.

"Auntie," said Celia, running after her to the gate, "I'll be very good
and try to comfort mother. And we'll not let grandfather think there's
anything wrong. But oh, auntie dear, I _hope_ you'll soon bring dear
Baby safe home."

"So do I, darling," said auntie, stooping to kiss her, even though she
was so hurried, and, for the first time, there was a little quiver in
her voice, and Celia ran back to the others, thinking even more than
before how good and brave auntie was.

They hastened down the road, auntie and little Mademoiselle Lucie, I
mean. But when they had gone some little way, auntie stopped short.

"He may have gone by the other road, and we may miss him that way;" for,
without thinking, auntie had hurried out by the little gate opening on
to the lower road.

"I think not," said Mademoiselle Lucie, "at least the concierge would
have been sure to see him, and we did ask her, and she had not seen him
at all."

"To be sure," said auntie, "I forgot about the concierge."

"Besides," Mademoiselle Lucie continued, "to get to the town he must
pass the way we are going, a little farther on where the two roads run
together."

"To be sure," said auntie, again.

"It is to the town we are going?" asked Mademoiselle Lucie.

"Yes," said auntie, "I have an idea, but I did not like to say it to my
sister for fear it should lead to nothing. There is a shop in the town
where there is a picture that Baby took a great fancy to the other day.
At least it was I that noticed it first, and he was so pleased with it.
There was something else in the shop that he was looking at--I don't
remember what--when we noticed the picture."

"Do you know where the shop is? Can we easily find it?"

"I think so; yes, I am sure I can find it," said auntie. "It is a shop
of curiosities, a shop at a corner, the street is narrow."

"I know it," said Mademoiselle Lucie, "though it is not very well known.
There are grander shops of curiosities which are more visited, but I
know that shop, as I often pass it."

She told auntie the name of the owner of the shop, and of the street,
and then auntie fixed, as they were now near the town, that she would go
on alone to the shop, while Mademoiselle Lucie went to her brother, who,
she hoped, would be at home at this hour, and get him to go with her to
the police office, so that no time should be lost.

Auntie hurried on by herself, but though she went so fast that the
easy-going peasants driving their sleepy bullocks, whom she met, looked
after her in surprise, she did not, for one moment, leave off looking
about her on every side, to see if by any chance she could discover the
well-known little figure it would have given her such joy to see. But
no. Once or twice a child in the distance made her heart beat a little
quicker, but, as soon as she got near enough to see it clearly, her
hopes sank again. There were very few houses on the country road leading
from the villa till one was quite in the town. So auntie thought it not
worth while to ask, for, in a street of houses and shops standing close
together, and people constantly passing, it was much less likely that
any one would have noticed a little tot like Herr Baby making his way.

"No," said auntie to herself, "it is no use stopping to ask. The best
thing I can do is to find the shop at once, and if they can tell me
nothing there, to follow Mademoiselle Lucie to the police office."

And, with a deep sigh, for, somehow, every step she took farther without
seeing anything of the little truant, made auntie's heart feel
heavier--she hurried on again.

She soon found the wide street--the street with the dressmakers' and
milliners' shops, which Fritz had not cared to look at--then she turned
one corner and went on a little farther, then another, and--yes, there
was the little old shop, looking just the same as the day they had all
stood there so happily. Auntie had been walking very quickly, almost
running, but when she saw the shop just before her she stood still--she
felt _so_ anxious--what should she do if she could hear nothing of Baby?

When she got to the door she stopped and looked in; there seemed to be
no one in the shop. Auntie glanced up to the side of the door where the
little portrait had hung. It was gone! Could that have anything to do
with Baby? auntie asked herself in a sort of puzzled way. Could Baby
have thought of buying it? how much money had he? But it was stupid and
foolish to stand there puzzling and wondering, instead of boldly going
in to ask. Auntie took her courage in her two hands, as the saying is,
and went in.

No one there; where could the owner of the shop be? The last time he had
come forward at once when they were only looking in--a little-dried up
old man, just the sort of person one would expect to find in such a
shop, sitting in a dark corner like an old spider, watching to see what
flies were passing his way. Auntie went right in without seeing any one,
but she heard voices not far off, and, in her anxiety, she went forward
to a door slightly open, leading into rooms behind the shop. She
knocked--but for a moment no one took any notice. They were talking so
eagerly inside that she had to knock again, and in the moment or two
that had passed without them hearing her, she heard one or two words
that made her eager to hear more.

"No, no," some one was saying, "much better go at once to the office. We
may get into trouble."

"He seems so sensible," said another voice. "_I_ say, better go with him
and carry the things, and we shall soon see if he knows his way,
and----"

Auntie _could_ not wait any more. She pushed open the door and went in.
There was, however, no Herr Baby to be seen, as she had almost expected
there would be. There was the old man that she remembered having seen
before, looking like a very startled spider this time, as he raised his
two shrivelled old arms in surprise at her appearance, and beside him
was a very pleasant, bright-faced, young woman, with a baby in her arms,
talking, or at least looking as if she had just been talking very
eagerly.

"Is he here?" said auntie, quite breathless, "my little boy, my little
nephew, I mean. Is Baby here?"

The young woman looked at the old man with a sort of little nod of
triumph.

"You see," she said quickly, "I said there was no need to frighten the
poor darling by taking him to the police office." "Yes, Madame," she
went on, turning to auntie, "the dear bb is here--that is to say, he
cannot but be the one you are looking for. I sent him out into the
little garden with his cat and my little girl, while my grandfather and
I talked about what to do. I would have sent him home, I mean we would
have tried to find his home, if my husband had been here, but he is
away."

"And I am too feeble, Madame, as you see, to walk far," said the old
man, who seemed now anxious to be very amiable.

"But you talked of taking him to the police office," said the young
woman, in a low voice, "the idea! to frighten a bb like that."

"Hush, hush," said the old man, "all was to be done for the best. You
shall see him, your dear child, Madame," he went on, bustling about.

"But tell me first--a moment----" said auntie, "What did he come for?
Did he buy the picture?"

"The picture," repeated the old man, "no, surely. It was the glass jugs,
the little gentleman wanted, and he had his money all right--I took but
the just price, Madame--I would not deceive any one."

"They are very dear to _my_ mind," said the young woman, "but there--I
know nothing about old things. This is not our shop, Madame--I look in
in passing, to see the grandfather sometimes, that is all."

  [Illustration: Auntie stood still a moment to listen.--P. 155.]

"And Baby came to buy some _jugs_, you say," repeated auntie. There
was a confused remembrance in her mind of something Baby had said about
jugs, something he had asked her to look at the day they had stood at
the shop window, but which she had since forgotten. Her only idea in
coming to the little old shop had been the picture. "You said he came to
buy some jugs?" she said again.

"Yes, Madame," said the old man "two glass jugs--Venetian glass."

"Ah!" said auntie, and then she remembered it all--about the glass jugs
that Baby had broken at home, and what he had said to her about those in
the shop window being like them. "And the picture?" she said, "is it no
longer there? But first, let me have my little boy. He is in the garden,
you say?"

She looked round, for there was no sign of a garden. The window of the
little room in which they were, looked out only on to a blank wall.

"This way, Madame," said the young woman, opening a door at the side. It
led into a little dark passage, and, at the end of it, there was another
door, standing open, and through this door came the sound of children's
voices.

Auntie stood still a moment to listen--the first words made her smile.

"Him wants to go home now," said the well-known voice. "Little girl, why
_won't_ you listen? Him wants to go home, and so does Minet. Doesn't you
hear?"

The little girl must have been very much puzzled, for auntie heard her
trying her best, in her baby talk, to make this queer little stranger
understand that they were to stay out in the garden till her mother
called them in.

"Him wants to go _home_, and so does Minet," repeated poor Baby, and his
voice began to quiver and shake, as if he were going to cry. Auntie
could stand it no longer. She hurried out into the little garden.

"You shall go home now, Baby dear," she said. "Auntie has come to fetch
you."

Baby looked up eagerly at the sound of a well-known voice. He ran to her
and held up his little face for a kiss. He looked very pleased, but not
at all surprised. It was one of Herr Baby's funny ways, that he almost
never seemed surprised.

"Him is so glad you's come," he said. "You'll help him to carry home the
shiny jugs, for Minet's _raver_ tired, and him might have to carry her
and the money-box. But you won't tell mother about the jugs, will you?
You'll let him run in wif them him's self, won't you, auntie? _Won't_
mother be pleased?"

"But you must tell me all about it, dear," said auntie; "did you come
off all alone to get the glasses? Why didn't you ask some one to come
with you?"

Baby looked a little troubled.

"Him didn't come _alone_," he said. "Him told Minet, and Minet comed
too, only her's werry tired. And it were for the party, auntie," he
added, looking up wistfully, "Lisa said mother had no pitty jugs for
her's party. And oh, auntie, p'ease do be kick, 'fear we shall be too
late."

Auntie took his hand and led him back into the shop, where the old man
was wrapping up the jugs with a great show of soft paper, that auntie
should see how careful he was.

"Has my little boy paid you?" she asked.

"Oh yes," said Herr Baby, understanding, though she did not speak
English. "See in him's money-box;" he held out the money-box with some
difficulty for, having Minet under the other arm, it was not easy for
him to get his hands free; "him had two yellow pennies, one big and one
little, him gived the big one for the shiny jugs."

"Was that the price of the jugs?" auntie asked the man.

"No, Madame, I have the change to give the little gentleman. See here,"
and he held out two large silver coins, the size of crowns, which auntie
took.

"I don't think the jugs are dear," she said, with a smile, turning to
the young woman, who looked pleased. "And some day," she went on, "we
will come to see you, and bring you some little thing for your little
girl, as you have been so kind to my little boy. Come now, Baby dear, we
must get home as quick as we can."

"But the little girl, the pitty little girl," said Herr Baby, "him must
say good-bye to _her_."

"There she is beside you," said auntie, thinking, of course, that he
meant the young woman's little girl, "say good-bye to her."

"No, no," said Baby, "him doesn't mean her. Him means the pitcher little
girl, _her_," he went on, pointing to the young woman, "her gottened her
down for him to see, 'cos him were trying to reach up to kiss her."

That was why the picture was no longer in the window then? Where was it?
Auntie turned round as she felt Baby pulling her.

"Her's there," he said, pointing to a chair on which the picture had
been set down hurriedly with the face the other way. Auntie turned it
round. Dear little face! It smiled at her again with the pretty half
wistful, half wise expression, which had so taken her fancy. Now it
seemed to her to be saying--

"I am so glad you have found him. I knew where he was. I am so glad to
have helped you to find him;" and when Baby lifted his little face to
kiss, with his rosy living lips, the picture of the child, who had once
been living and loving like him, I can hardly tell you the strange
feeling that went through auntie's heart.

"She must have been a dear good little girl, whoever she was," she
thought to herself. "It would be nice to leave a sweet feeling behind
one in the world long after one is dead, such as that little face gives.
I should like to have that picture. I must see about it."

But to-day there was no time to be wasted.

Auntie took Baby by the hand, persuading him to let her carry the
precious jugs, as Minet and the money-box were already more than enough
for him. And, even with her help, it was not so easy to manage at all,
and auntie was very glad to meet Mademoiselle Lucie a little way down
the street, and get her to carry part.

Mademoiselle Lucie was delighted, as you can fancy, to see Herr Baby
again. She had been coming back in great trouble to look for auntie; for
very unluckily, as she thought, she had found that her brother was out,
and she had not therefore gone to the police office.

"A very good thing, after all," said auntie; "it would only have been
giving trouble for nothing, as we have found him."

But she said to Mademoiselle Lucie, in a low voice, to say nothing about
the police before Herr Baby, as it might frighten him.

"Would it not, perhaps, be a good thing to frighten him a little?" said
Mademoiselle Lucie; "he would not run off again."

Auntie shook her head.

"Not in that way," she said. "We will make him understand how he has
frightened _us_. That will be the best way."

"How did he mean to get home alone, I wonder," said Mademoiselle Lucie;
"how could he have carried all he had, and Minet too?"

"I don't know, I'm sure," said auntie. "How did you mean to carry
everything home, Baby dear?"

Baby looked puzzled.

"Him doesn't know," he said. "P'r'aps him thought Minet would carry
some," he added, with a smile.

Auntie smiled too. Mademoiselle Lucie looked up for auntie to explain to
her, for she did not understand Baby's talk any better than he did hers.

Suddenly another idea struck auntie.

"How did you manage to tell the old man in the shop what you wanted to
buy?" she said.

Baby considered.

"Him sawed the pitty little girl," he said; "her was looking at the
shiny glasses--_always_--her was keeping them for him. Him asked her to.
Then him touched them; him climbed up on a chair in the shop and touched
them, and then him showed all him's pennies to the old man; but the lady
wif the baby knowed the best what him wanted. Her were very nice, but
the pitty little girl were the goodest, weren't her?"

Auntie listened quietly, for Baby spoke quite gravely.

"It would be nice to have that pretty picture, wouldn't it, Baby?"

"Yes," said Baby; but he didn't look _quite_ pleased. "Auntie," he said,
"him doesn't like you to call her a _pitcher_. Him thinks her's a _zeal_
little girl, a zeal fairy little girl. Her tookened care of the shiny
glasses so nice for him, didn't her?"

And auntie smiled again.




CHAPTER IX.

"EAST OR WEST, HAME IS BEST"

   "But home is home wherever it is,
    When we're all together and nothing amiss."
                                      _Irish Ballad._


By this time, of course, it was quite dark. It had been quite light when
auntie and Mademoiselle Lucie set off, but at Santino the darkness comes
on very quickly. Poor Baby, he _would_ have been in trouble if auntie
had not come to look, for him--- that is to say if the old man and the
young woman had allowed him to set off on his journey home alone. I
don't think he would ever have got there, for in the dark he could not
have found his way, and he certainly could never have got the shiny jugs
and Minet and the money-box all home in safety!

The ladies and gentlemen who were coming to dine at the Villa had all
arrived. Mother was sitting in the drawing-room talking to them, and
trying her best to look as if there was nothing the matter, to prevent
grandfather finding out that there was. Poor mother, it was not very
easy for her, was it? Grandfather was a good deal put out, as it was, at
auntie's being so late. He, too, tried not to look cross, poor old
gentleman, but any one who knew him at all well could not help seeing as
he moved about the room, sometimes giving a poke to the wood fire which
was burning quite brightly as it was, sometimes sharply pulling open one
of the window-shutters and looking out, as if he could see anything with
the light inside and the dark out of doors!--any one could see that he
_was_ very much put out. He sat down now and then for a minute or two
and spoke very politely--for grandfather was a _very_ polite old
gentleman--to one or other of the stranger ladies, but even to them he
could not help showing what was in his mind.

"It is very strange, really most exceedingly strange, of my eldest
daughter," he said, "not to be in before this. I really feel quite
ashamed of it, my dear Madam."

"But you are not uneasy, I hope," said the lady, kindly. "There cannot
be anything the matter with Miss Leonard?" ("Miss Leonard" was what
Fritz called auntie's "stuck-up name," and "Lady Aylmer" was mother's.)
"You don't feel uneasy about her?"

(This lady did not know there _was_ anything the matter, for she was
quite at the other end of the room from mother. Mother had whispered to
the lady beside her, who was an old and dear friend, how frightened she
was about Herr Baby, and the old lady, who was very kind and nice, was
talking and smiling as much as she could to help poor mother.)

"Uneasy," said grandfather, rather sharply, and not _quite_ so politely
as he generally spoke, "oh no, of course I'm not _uneasy_. My daughter
Helen can take care of herself. I am only very much surprised at her
doing such an extraordinary thing as forgetting the hour like this."

But in his heart I fancy what the lady said did make grandfather begin
to think there might be something to be uneasy about, and this made him
still crosser. She was not such a sensible lady as old Mrs. Bryan in the
arm-chair opposite, who chattered the more the more she saw
grandfather's worried look grow worse, and the pain grew plainer on poor
mother's white face.

"May," he called out at last, "I think it is nonsense waiting dinner
any longer. Tell one of the children to ring and order it up at once.
Why, they're not here! Why are none of the children down, May?
Everything seems at sixes and sevens."

"We are not waiting for Nelly, father dear," said mother. "I don't know
why dinner isn't ready yet, but I think it can't be long. I will hurry
them," and she got up to ring herself.

"But the children--why aren't they down?" said grandfather again.

Mother hesitated--

"It is rather late for them," she said. "The girls have been a long walk
and are tired."

She did not know what to say, poor thing. She had not dared to let the
three children come into the drawing-room, for fear their white faces
and red eyes should make grandfather find out that there _was_ something
wrong, and indeed neither Celia, nor Denny, nor Fritz, would have been
able to stay still in the room for five minutes. They were peeping out
of the nursery every few seconds, running along to the end of the
balcony, and straining their eyes and ears in trying to see or hear
anything coming in the shape of good news.

Long, long afterwards they used to speak in the nursery, with deep
breaths, of "that _terrible_ evening when Herr Baby was lost."

But it was, of course, the worst for poor mother. It was bad enough in
the nursery, where the tea, that nobody had cared to touch, was set out
as neatly as usual on the table; the chairs drawn round, the one that
Baby always had with a footstool on it--to make up for there being no
high chair at the Villa--in its place, though the well-known, funny
little figure was not perched on it. And Lisa, with a face swollen so
that no one would have known her, fussing away to have the kettle
boiling, so that her darling should have some hot tea as soon as ever he
came in--for she wouldn't allow but that he would soon come in, though
sad little stories kept running through Celia's and Denny's heads about
children that had been lost and never found, or found only when it was
no longer they themselves but only their poor little bodies, drowned,
perhaps, or "choked in the snow," as Denny said. And she got rather
cross when Celia reminded her that there was no snow, so it couldn't be
_that_, any way.

All this was bad enough, but still they were free to talk about their
fears, and to cry if they felt inclined, and to keep running to the
window or the door. But for poor mother, as you can fancy, it was _much_
worse. There she had to sit smiling and talking as if everything were
quite nice and comfortable, not only for the sake of the friends who had
come to dine with them, but still more for poor grandfather's sake, who
kept growing more and more fidgety and put out, and at the bottom of his
heart, though he would not own it even to himself, really frightened and
anxious.

At last his patience was exhausted.

"May," he said, speaking across the fireplace to mother. She was talking
to the lady beside her, and did not at first hear him. "_May_," said
grandfather again, and if the children had been in the room I think his
voice would have made them jump, "it is using our friends very badly to
keep them waiting so long for dinner. Be so good as to ring again and
tell the servants we will _not_ wait any longer."

Poor mother--she looked up--it was all she could do not to burst into
tears!

"Yes," she said, "I will tell them."

She was half rising from her seat, whispering to the lady beside her
(the lady who _did_ know all about it), "I don't know _how_ I shall get
through dinner," when--what was it?--no bell had rung, there was no
sound that any one else heard, what could it have been that _mother_
heard? I don't know what it was, and I daresay mother herself could not
have told, but something she did hear. For she stopped short, and a sort
of eager look came into her eyes and a flush into her cheeks. And then
the other people in the room seemed to catch the infection, and
everybody else looked up to see what was coming, and in the silence a
sort of fumbling was heard at the door. It only lasted a second or two,
then somehow the handle turned, much more quickly than was usually the
case when it was Baby's small hands that were stretching up to reach
it--I rather think some one must have been behind to help him--the door
opened and--oh such a funny little figure came in! You know who it was
of course, but it would be very difficult to tell you exactly what he
looked like. He was dressed just as he had been for playing in the
garden--a little short thick jacket over his holland blouse, which was
no longer very clean; his short scarlet socks and oldest boots on his
legs, the bare part of which looked very red and cold, and what had been
his best straw hat with part of the brim dangling down, on his curly
head. But he seemed quite pleased with himself--that was another of
Herr Baby's "ways"; he always did seem quite pleased with himself, best
of all, I think, when he had his oldest clothes on--he trotted into the
room just as he would have trotted into the garden, even though there
were a good many rather finely-dressed ladies and gentlemen sitting
round--for his whole mind was filled with the thoughts of two big paper
parcels which he carried in his arms. They could not have been as heavy
as they were big, or else he could not possibly have carried them! And
close at his heels, making him look still funnier, came Minet, very
pleased, I am sure, to find herself again in sight of a fire.

Herr Baby looked round him for a moment, only for a moment, for though
the lights in the room and the number of people dazzled and puzzled him
a little, _he_ did not need to look round for which was mother.
Forgetting all about everything, except that her baby was found, up
jumped mother, a rosy flush coming over her face which had looked so
white and sad, pretty mother with her silvery silky dress and her sweet
eyes filled with tears, and rushing over to Baby caught him up in her
arms, poor little cold, tired, red-legged Herr Baby, and for a minute or
so, greatly to grandfather's surprise, she hid her face somehow among
the wee man's curls without speaking.

  [Illustration: Forgetting all about everything, except that her baby
  was found, up jumped mother.--P. 170.]

Grandfather was surprised but not alarmed, for just behind in the open
doorway stood auntie, who came quietly forward and explained to him that
Baby had gone out on his own account and they had been afraid of his
losing his way, that was what had kept her out so late, and she was _so_
sorry. Auntie had such a nice clear simple way of speaking,
grandfather's vexation seemed to melt away as he listened. He glanced at
the little figure still clasped in mother's arms, and a queer look came
into his eyes.

"Poor children!" he said, "poor children! May, you should have told me."

But he knew why they hadn't told him. The ladies and gentlemen came
round auntie to hear what she was saying. They were all very kind and
very sorry and very glad. But it was difficult not to smile when a
little voice was heard saying,

"Mother, p'ease put him down. Him's got somesing _so_ pitty, but him's
afraid of breaking them."

And sliding down to the ground, he managed somehow to set the two
parcels safely on the floor, and began undoing them. They all watched
him, but he didn't care, and he would let nobody help him. He got one
out at last, and held it up with a beautiful happiness in his little
face.

"See, mother!" he cried, "shiny jugs! Him's got them all himself wif
him's own pennies. Two! Them's for you, mother, 'cos him boked you's
'nother ones. Him founded them himself in a shop. Him's been as quick as
him could, 'cos of mother's party, to make the table pitty."

"My darling," said mother, hugging him again, and when she looked up
half smiling, half crying, and tried to say to the ladies and gentlemen
that she hoped they would not think her silly, there were tears in some
other eyes besides in hers.

But Herr Baby was quite himself.

"You _is_ p'eased," he said contentedly. "Then him'll go to tea, for
him's raver hungry. But p'ease put the shiny jugs on the table to make
it pitty."

He held up his face for another kiss. Then grandfather came forward and
in his turn lifted the little truant into his arms.

"He is tired, the poor little man," he said, looking round: "you are so
kind; I should ask you to forgive our want of politeness, but I am sure
you will. I will be back in a moment."

And it was grandfather himself who carried off Herr Baby and gave him
over to Lisa, weeping for joy now, as she caught her darling in her
arms.

There _was_ a happy tea in the nursery that night after all. Baby was
very tired, but so exceedingly pleased with himself that his face grew
rosy and his eyes bright, as if he had only just wakened up in the
morning, as he sat at the table answering all the questions of Celia and
Denny and Fritz and Lisa about his adventures. How had he found his way?
How had he made the old man understand what he wanted? Hadn't he been
frightened? Had he been pleased to see auntie? Had he carried Minet all
the way? Oh, there were more questions than I could tell you--almost
more than Herr Baby could answer; and Minet, too, came in for a share of
the petting.

When they had got most of their questions answered, they all found out
they were very hungry, and they set to work at their tea, and for a
while there was silence in the nursery. Suddenly Baby leant his two
elbows on the table and looked round.

"It were all the pitty little girl that keeped the shiny glasses for
him. Her _are_ so pitty."

"What little girl?" said the children, all together.

"Do you mean the young woman's little girl in the shop?"

"No," said Herr Baby, "not that kind of little girl. Him means a little
girl up on the wall--a _pitcher_ girl; but him thinks her are a
_fairy_."

And having thus given his opinion, Baby looked round again with great
satisfaction, and Celia and Denny whispered to each other that really
Baby sometimes said very funny things for such a little boy!

They were all dressed as usual, and Denny and Baby went in to dessert,
while Celia and Fritz waited, as became such _big_ young people, in the
drawing-room. Everybody was very kind to the children, and Baby, had he
been any one else _but_ Herr Baby, would have been spoilt by all the
petting the ladies wanted to give him. But his eyes were fixed on one
thing, or rather on two things, on the table, one in front of mother at
one end, one in front of grandfather at the other, there they stood, two
queerly-shaped glass jugs, sparkling and shining with many colours like
a rainbow, filled with the brightest and clearest water which might have
been drawn at a fairy well. And what pleasure shone in Baby's face as he
looked at them.

"You _is_ p'eased?" he said again to mother, as he bade her good-night.

It was a little difficult for mother to have to make "him" understand
that much as she loved him for remembering how sorry she had been to
have the first jugs broken, and how sweet she thought it of him to have
got her new ones, that still he must never again think of doing such
things by himself and without telling or asking any one.

She did not say anything to him that night; she could not bear to spoil
his pretty pleasure, but the next day she made him understand; and Baby
"p'omised" he would never again set off on his own account, or settle
any plan without asking mother or auntie, or perhaps Celia, about it.

And so the end of the story of the broken jugs was quite a happy one.

       *       *       *       *       *

Herr Baby's birthday came in the late spring. They were all back in
England by then. The old garden was no longer "lonely," for the
children's voices were heard all over it, and the sunlight through the
leaves flickered on to their curly heads as they ran about in delight,
seeking for all their old favourite corners. The "labbits" were well and
happy; Jones and Thomas had come to meet them at the railway station
with broad smiles on their honest faces; all the house looked bright
and smiling, too, it had been so well rubbed up to receive
them--altogether Herr Baby thought "coming back" was a very nice and
happy thing, though he had enjoyed himself so much at Santino that he
told Lisa he didn't think he would much mind if they _did_ go there
again next winter, when it began to get cold at home, as was already
spoken of, as Santino had done grandfather so much good this time.

So, as I was saying, it was a very happy little man, indeed, that woke
up in his "own dear little bed,"--which, wonderful to say, had not grown
too small for him all the months they had been away,--on the morning of
Herr Baby's fifth birthday. He could hardly stand still to be dressed,
so eager was he to run off to mother's room to get her birthday kiss,
and to see the presents which he knew would not have been forgotten.
They turned out even prettier than he had expected; indeed, it would
take me too long were I to tell you all about the beautiful box of
bricks, big enough to build real houses almost, Baby thought, from
grandfather, and the lovely pair of toy horses with _real_ hair, in a
stable, from mother, and the coachman's whip to crack at them from
Fritz, and the pair of slippers Celia and Denny had worked for him, one
foot each, and the birthday cake all snowed over with sugar, and with
his name on in pink, from grandfather and mother together, "'asides
their other presents." It quite took Herr Baby's breath away to think
all these lovely things were for him; he sat at the nursery table quite
unable to eat his breakfast, something like Fritz the morning they were
starting on their journey, do you remember? till Lisa persuaded him to
eat, by telling him if he didn't, he would be so tired that he wouldn't
enjoy his birthday at all, which made him set to work at his bread and
milk. Lisa, too, had remembered the day, for she had made him the
prettiest little penny purse you ever saw, knitted in bright-coloured
silk, so that now he was very well off, indeed, with his "scented" purse
for his gold and silver, and Lisa's one for pennies and halfpennies, and
his money-box to store up the rest in when the purses were full. He had
all his presents set out in a row, so that he could see them while he
was eating, and just when he was at nearly the last spoonful, he was
quite startled by a voice beside him, saying, "And what about _my_
present, Baby, dear? Did you think I had forgotten your birthday?"

It was auntie. She had come in so quietly that Herr Baby had not heard
her. She leant over his chair, and he put his arms round her neck and
kissed her.

"Him is so happy, auntie dear," he said; "him has such lots of p'esents,
him never thought about your p'esent."

"Didn't you, dear?" said auntie, smiling. "Well, _I_ didn't forget
it--indeed, I thought of it a long time ago, as you will see. Come with
me, for I see you have finished your breakfast."

Auntie took him by the hand. Baby wondered where she was going to, and
he was rather surprised when she led him to his own room--that is to
say, to the pretty nursery where he and Denny had their two little white
beds side by side.

"Look up, Baby," said auntie.

And looking up, what do you think he saw? On the wall, at the side of
his own little bed, where his eyes could see it the first thing in the
morning, and the last at night, hung the picture of the blue-eyed little
girl, the dear little girl of long ago, with her sweet rosy face, and
queer old-fashioned white frock, smiling down at him, with the sort of
wise, loving look, just as she had smiled down at him in the old shop at
Santino.

"Oh, auntie, auntie!" cried Baby. But then he seemed as if he could say
no more. He just stared up at the sweet little face, clasping his hands,
as if he was _too_ pleased to speak. Then, at last, he turned to auntie
and _hugged_ her.

"Oh, auntie!" he said again. "Oh, him _is_ so p'eased to have him's own
pitty little girl always smiling at him. Him will _always_ have her,
won't him, auntie?"

"I hope so, dear. She is your very own."

"Him will keep her till him is _kite_ old. Him will show her to him's
children and him's g'anchildren, won't him?" went on Baby solemnly.

"I hope so, dear," said auntie again, smiling at his flushed little
face.

"Her _is_ so pitty," said Baby. "Her is as sweet as a fairy. Auntie, him
would _so_ like to hear all the story about her. Couldn't you find it
out, auntie?"

"Perhaps," said auntie, "or, what would be still better, perhaps the
little girl will whisper it to you some night when you are asleep."

"That _would_ be nice," said Baby. Then another thought struck him.
"Auntie," he said, "will you ask mother to let him bring up the shiny
jugs to show them to the pitty little girl? Her would like to see them
so nice, and not brokened at all wif the packing. Oh, auntie, what a
bootiful birfday--him are _so_ happy!"


THE END.

_Printed by_ R. & R. CLARK, _Edinburgh._



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ADVENTURES OF HERR BABY***


******* This file should be named 29380-8.txt or 29380-8.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/2/9/3/8/29380



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.org/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
